R E V I E W S

SYNTHETIC BIOLOGY
Steven A. Benner and A. Michael Sismour
Abstract | Synthetic biologists come in two broad classes. One uses unnatural molecules to 
reproduce emergent behaviours from natural biology, with the goal of creating artificial life. The 
other seeks interchangeable parts from natural biology to assemble into systems that function 
unnaturally. Either way, a synthetic goal forces scientists to cross uncharted ground to 
encounter and solve problems that are not easily encountered through analysis. This drives 
the emergence of new paradigms in ways that analysis cannot easily do. Synthetic biology has 
generated diagnostic tools that improve the care of patients with infectious diseases, as well as 
devices that oscillate, creep and play tic-tac-toe.

Those familiar with academia know that disputes over 
trademarks can be more intense (and, in a prurient 
sense, more interesting) than disputes over substance. 
Synthetic biology has such a dispute in the making.

The title ‘synthetic biology’ appeared in the litera-
ture in 1980, when it was used by Barbara Hobom to 
describe bacteria that had been genetically engineered 
using recombinant DNA technology1. These bacteria 
are living systems (therefore biological) that have been 
altered by human intervention (that is, synthetically). In 
this respect, synthetic biology was largely synonymous 
with ‘bioengineering’.

In 2000, the term ‘synthetic biology’ was again intro-
duced by Eric Kool and other speakers at the annual 
meeting of the American Chemical Society in San 
Francisco2. Here, the term was used to describe the syn-
thesis of unnatural organic molecules that function in 
living systems. More broadly in this sense, the term has 
been used with reference to efforts to ‘redesign life’3– 5. 
This use of the term is an extension of the concept of 
‘biomimetic chemistry’, in which organic synthesis 
is used to create artificial molecules that recapitulate 
the behaviour of parts of biology, typically enzymes6. 
Synthetic biology has a broader scope, however, in that 
it attempts to recreate in unnatural chemical systems 
the emergent properties of living systems7, including 
inheritance, genetics and evolution3– 5,8. Synthetic biolo-
gists seek to assemble components that are not natural 
(therefore synthetic) to generate chemical systems that 
support Darwinian evolution (therefore biological). 
By carrying out the assembly in a synthetic way, these 

scientists hope to understand non-synthetic biology, 
that is, ‘natural’ biology. This motivation is similar in 
biomimetic chemistry, where synthetic enzyme models 
are important for understanding natural enzymes.

More recently, an engineering community has given 
further meaning to the title. This community seeks to 
extract from living systems interchangeable parts that 
might be tested, validated as construction units, and 
reassembled to create devices that might (or might 
not) have analogues in living systems9. The parts come 
from natural living systems (that is, they are biologi-
cal); their assembly is, however, unnatural. Therefore, 
one engineering goal might be to assemble biological 
components (such as proteins that bind DNA and the 
DNA sequences that they bind) to create, for example, 
outputs analogous to those of a computer.

A common ground between the ‘synthetic biology’ 
and engineering communities lies in the global strategy 
by which scientists come to understand their subject 
matter, make discoveries and overturn paradigms. 
Synthesis offers opportunities for achieving these 
goals that observation and analysis do not. The use of 
synthesis in a way that complements analysis will be a 
main theme of this review BOX 1.

Synthetic biology already has many accomplish-
ments to its credit. The effort to generate synthetic 
genetic systems has yielded diagnostic tools, such as 
Bayer’s branched DNA assay (described in a later sec-
tion), which annually helps improve the care of some 
400,000 patients infected with HIV and hepatitis 
viruses10–12. These and other artificial genetic systems 

© 2005 Nature Publishing Group 

 VOLUME 6 | JULY 2005 | 533

Department of Chemistry, 
University of Florida, 
Gainesville, FL 32611-7200, 
USA. 
Correspondence to S.A.B. 
e-mail: benner@chem.
ufl.edu
doi:10.1038/nrg1637

NATURE REVIEWS | GENETICS 

R E V I E W S

Box 1 | What synthesis can do that observation and analysis cannot
The scientific method captures the full range of human activities. Life scientists can 
apply it to observe the foraging strategies of moose87, or to use X-ray crystallography 
to determine the molecular structure of the ribosome88, although the intellectual 
procedures involved in each case have little in common.

However, one theme is universal: it is easy for human scientists to convince 

themselves that data contain patterns that they do not, conclude that patterns support 
models when they need not, and believe that models are truth, which they are not. 
These observations are not pejorative. They reflect the same processes in the human 
mind that enable it to be effective and creative. Therefore, although the ‘scientific 
method’ that is taught in school emphasizes unfiltered observations, analyzing data 
with an open mind and conducting value-neutral experiments, the outcome of science 
does not depend on how well it meets this largely fictional idea, but rather how well 
scientists manage the values and filters that come naturally with human thought.

Synthesis offers one way to manage these. Synthesis defines an ambitious ‘put-a-

man-on-the-moon’ goal. By doing so, it forces scientists and engineers to cross 
uncharted terrain in pursuit of the goal. This requires the solution of unscripted 
problems that are not normally encountered through either observation or analysis. 
Furthermore, the problems cannot be ignored if they contradict a paradigm. With 
analysis, if the data contradict the theory, the data are (as often as not) discarded to 
protect the theory. If one does this when putting an orbiter around Mars, however, 
the orbiter crashes89. For this reason, synthesis drives the evolution of paradigms, 
however this elusive term is defined90,91.

This is well illustrated in chemistry, which has long had powerful synthetic tools. 

For example, the late Robert Woodward credited the discovery of the rules 
underlying the orbital symmetry of molecules, for which Roald Hoffmann and 
Kenichi Fukui won the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1981, to problems encountered 
during the synthesis of vitamin B12 REF. 92. Because vitamin B12 is a large molecule 
with many sterogenic (chiral) centers, the synthesis of B12 was, for chemistry at that 
time, the equivalent of a ‘man-on-the-moon’ goal. Accomplishing this goal led not 
only to a synthetic route to a complex molecule, but more importantly to a greater 
understanding of chemical bonding; something that was not accessible by simply 
observing the structure of B12. It also drove the development of modern analytical 
tools, such as high-performance liquid chromatography.

Similarly powerful synthetic tools are not available for many other fields. Planetary 
scientists and stellar physicists cannot, today, synthesize new planets or new stars to 
test theories and models about these systems. Biology, by contrast, has developed 
those tools over the past quarter century. During this time, in Barbara Hobom’s sense 
of the term, biologists have been synthesizing parts of living systems to test their 
ideas. The combination of chemistry, biology and engineering is now at the point 
where the ‘man-on-the-moon’ goal is approachable: creating artificial Darwinian 
systems. One of the metrics of the success of synthetic biology will be how well the 
effort to assemble existing biological parts into machines, and how well the effort to 
create artificial systems that reproduce the emergent properties of living systems 
drives new discoveries and new theories.

the macroscopic physical world, building units often do, 
especially if they are designed to do so (as in modular 
software assembly, for example). Ultimately, synthetic 
biology succeeds or fails as an engineering discipline 
depending on where independence approximations 
become useful in the continuum between the atomic 
and macroscopic worlds.

As a science, synthetic biology can be evaluated in 
different ways. By measuring the insights, discoveries and 
paradigm shifts that are driven by synthetic biology, we 
ask here whether the synthetic approach has contributed 
in a way that is not easily possible by analysis alone.

Seeking interchangeable parts: DNA
As described by Watson and Crick 52 years ago, DNA has 
a modular structure. In a reductionist sense, DNA can 
be described as two antiparallel strands. Each strand 
is assembled from four different nucleotide building 
blocks, which are themselves assembled from sug-
ars, phosphates, and nucleobases. These are, in turn, 
assembled from carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, phosphorus 
and hydrogen atoms.

In the Watson–Crick model, nucleotide pairs con-
tribute independently to the stability of a duplex. In 
reality, this is a good approximation. DNA duplexes can 
be designed with considerable success by applying just 
two rules: A pairs with T, and G pairs with C. A second-
order model does very well by adding only the effect of 
adjacent base pairs into the calculation18. Although 
some diversity in nucleic acid structure and function 
is not captured by such simple rules (for example, 
that of ZDNA19, G QUARTETS20, and catalytic RNA21), most 
molecular biologists only use this diversity occasionally.
The elegance of the Watson–Crick model has caused 
most molecular biologists to overlook the chemical 
peculiarity of such rules. No other molecular system 
can be described so simply. For example, the behaviour 
of a protein is generally not a transparent function, lin-
ear or otherwise, of the behaviours of its constituent 
amino acids, even as an approximation. The power of 
the Watson–Crick rules was nevertheless sufficient to 
lead to complacency by most of those who learned the 
double helix structure; molecular recognition in DNA 
was a ‘solved problem’.

The role of the DNA backbone in molecular recognition. 
This complacency was only dislodged through synthesis 
of nucleic acids. Starting in the 1980s, some synthetic 
biologists began to wonder whether DNA and RNA were 
the only molecular structures that could support genet-
ics on Earth or elsewhere3,22,23. Other biologists, seeking 
technological goals, attempted to replace modules in the 
DNA structure to create DNA analogues that would, for 
example, passively enter cells, but could still support the 
‘A pairs with T, G pairs with C’ rule, with the aim of 
disrupting the performance of intracellular nucleic acids 
in a sequence-specific ‘antisense’ way24.

This antisense idea was simple in cartoon form. 
The phosphate backbone was thought to be largely 
responsible for the unsuitability of DNA as a drug: the 
repeating backbone phosphates prevented nucleic acids 

now support primitive genetic processes, including 
replication with the possibility of mutation13,14, selec-
tion15 and evolution. Synthetic biology has also gener-
ated some interesting toys from biomolecular parts, 
including systems that oscillate16 and that carry out 
simple computations17.

For engineering purposes, parts are most suitable 
when they contribute independently to the whole. 
This ‘independence property’ allows one to predict 
the behaviour of an assembly. Therefore, it makes 
sense to structure this review to follow the search for 
independently interchangeable parts.

This search turns out to be interesting. In molecular 
science, it is well known that the simplest building units 
(the atomic parts) do not always contribute independently 
to the behaviour of a molecular assembly (the whole). In 

ZDNA 
DNA that exists in a left handed 
helix rather than the typical 
right-handed helix of A- and B-
form DNA.

G QUARTET 
A secondary structure observed 
in G-rich DNA in which four 
consecutive guanosine residues 
bind to each other through 
interactions in the major groove 
to form very stable tertiary 
structures.

534 | JULY 2005 | VOLUME 6 

© 2005 Nature Publishing Group 

 www.nature.com/reviews/genetics

a Standard nucleobases

Major groove
O

N

R

Acceptor

H

N

N

H

H

O

Donor

H

N

Acceptor

Acceptor

pyDAA

N

R
C

N

H

N

G

b Synthetic nucleobases

Donor

Donor

Acceptor

Donor

Acceptor

puADD

pyADA

O

N

R
T

O

H

N

H

Donor

H

N

Acceptor

N

H

N

Donor

pyDAD

R

N

N

R

Acceptor

N

N

Donor

O

H

Acceptor

Acceptor

O

Donor

Donor

N

R

A

N

N

R

Donor

N

N

Acceptor

H

Missing 
functional 
group

Donor

puDAD

N

N

R

Donor

N

N

Acceptor

O

H

Acceptor

H

N

H

N

H

N

H

O

H

N

H

N

H

puADA

pyADD

puDAA

N

N

R

Donor

N

Donor

O

Acceptor

Donor

H

Donor

Acceptor

N

H

N

H

N

H

N

H

H

N

O

N

R

O

N

N

R

Acceptor

H

N

H

N

H

N

H

N

O
Minor groove

N

R

Acceptor

Donor

Acceptor

Acceptor

Donor

pyDDA

puDDA

pyAAD
puAAD
Figure 1 | Examples of alternative nucleobases. Parts of the nucleobases of DNA can be 
used as interchangeable building modules. The blue units are the hydrogen bonding donor (D) 
collections of atoms. The red units are the hydrogen bonding acceptor (A) collections of atoms. 
a | The four standard nucleobases are shown. b | Shuffling the hydrogen bond donor and 
acceptor modules generates eight additional nucleotides, which constitute a synthetic genetic 
system. These synthetic bases have been used in an artificial genetic system that can support 
Darwinian evolution. A, adenine; C, cytosine; G, guanine; Pu, purine; Py, pyrimidine; T, thymine. 

from partitioning into lipid phases, an event believed 
to be essential for molecules to enter cells passively. 
The phosphate–ribose backbone is also the recognition 
site for nucleases. This knowledge, and the fact that 
the Watson–Crick model proposed no particular role 
for the phosphates in molecular recognition, encour-
aged the inference that the backbone could be changed 
without affecting pairing rules.

The effort to synthesize non-ionic backbones 
changed the established view of nucleic acid struc-
ture. Nearly 100 linkers were synthesized to replace 
the 2′-deoxyribose sugar, starting with the first by 
the Pitha25 and Benner26 laboratories. Nearly all 
analogues that lacked the REPEATING CHARGE showed 
worse rule-based molecular recognition. Even with 
the most successful uncharged analogues (such 
as the polyamide-linked nucleic-acid analogues 
(PNA) created by Nielsen and his group27) molecules 
longer than 15 or 20 building units generally failed 
to support rule-based duplex formation. In other 
uncharged systems, the breakdown occurs earlier28.
This discovery was unfortunate for the antisense 
industry, but it had a marked effect on our under-
standing of DNA. The repeating charge in the DNA 

REPEATING CHARGE
Where the same ionic charge 
occurs at the same position of 
each monomeric subunit of a 
polymer.

THREOSE DNA 
DNA molecules based on the 
sugar threose rather than 
ribose.

LOCKED NUCLEIC ACIDS
Nucleic acids containing a CH2 
linkage between the 2′OH and 
4′ carbon of the ribose sugar.

R E V I E W S

backbone could no longer be viewed as a dispensable 
inconvenience. The same is true for the ribose back-
bone of RNA: although several backbones (such as 
THREOSE DNA or LOCKED NUCLEIC ACIDS) work as well or 
better than ribose24,29,30, most of the replacements work 
less well. The backbone is not simply scaffolding to hold 
the nucleobases in place; it has an important role in the 
molecular recognition that is central to genetics.

Evolution of genetic molecules. The above example 
illustrates how synthesis drives discovery and para-
digm change. The failure to obtain non-ionic DNA 
analogues that retain rule-based pairing led scientists 
to think about the chemical structures that might be 
needed to support Darwinian evolution.

In particular, a genetic molecule must be able to suf-
fer change (mutation) without markedly changing its 
overall physical properties. Again, this feature is infre-
quent in chemical systems (in proteins, for example). 
But because charge dominates the physical properties 
of a molecule, a repeating charge should allow append-
ages (the nucleobases, in the case of DNA and RNA) to 
be replaced without changing the dominant behaviour 
of a genetic system31. This has led to the suggestion 
that a repeating charge might be a universal feature of 
genetic molecules that work in water31.

Furthermore, the discovery that ribose was one of 
the better backbone sugars for supporting molecular 
recognition24,32 had implications for the origin of life on 
Earth. In the mid 1990s, Miller had commented that 
because of the ease with which ribose decomposes as a 
sugar on heating33, ribose could not have supported the 
first genetic system on Earth. The results from synthe-
sis, which indicated that ribose is especially good for 
genetics, drove efforts to find prebiotic routes to ribose 
that would overcome its intrinsic instability34,35.

Creating synthetic genetic systems. Synthesis focus-
ing on the nucleobases also generated discoveries. 
The Watson–Crick pairing rules arise from two rules 
of chemical complementarity. The first, size comple-
mentarity, pairs large purines with small pyrimidines. 
The second, hydrogen-bonding complementarity, pairs 
hydrogen-bond donors from one nucleobase with 
hydrogen-bond acceptors from the other.

If nucleobase pairing were indeed so simple, it 
should be possible to move atoms around within the 
nucleobases (on paper) to synthesize unnatural nucleo-
bases that would still pair following rules of size and 
hydrogen bonding complementarity, but differently 
from the natural nucleobases. Indeed, by shuffling the 
hydrogen-bond donating and accepting groups, one can 
easily generate eight additional synthetic nucleobases, 
forming four additional base pairs (FIG. 1).

In this case, synthesis showed that nucleobase pair-
ing is as simple as the Watson–Crick model implies. A 
synthetic genetic alphabet with up to 12 independently 
replicatable nucleobase pairs can be supported by an 
extended set of Watson–Crick rules36. Furthermore, a 
small amount of protein engineering converts natural 
polymerases into polymerases that accept components 

NATURE REVIEWS | GENETICS 

© 2005 Nature Publishing Group 

 VOLUME 6 | JULY 2005 | 535

R E V I E W S

Amplifier with 
hybridized 
label probes

Pre-amplifier

Target probe

Target RNA

Capture 
probe 
(solution)

Capture probe (microwell)

Figure 2 | Branched DNA assay developed by scientists at Chiron and Bayer 
Diagnostics. The target RNA molecule to be detected (the analyte) is attached to the plastic of a 
microwell (bottom) by the hybridization of the analyte to a series of capture probes. This complex 
then captures, through hybridization, a target probe, which in turn hybridizes to a pre-amplifier 
molecule, thereby ‘sandwiching’ the analyte between the capture probe and the pre-amplifier. 
The pre-amplifier captures a branched DNA dendrimer (amplifier) that contains several signalling 
molecules on each branch. As a consequence of the branching, a single analyte assembles a 
large number of signalling molecules in the microwell. These assays use the expanded genetic 
alphabet shown in FIG. 1. When standard nucleotides were used to assemble the signalling 
nanostructure, significant noise was seen, because non-target DNA that was present in the 
biological sample was captured by the probes in the microwell even in the absence of analyte. 
Incorporating components of the artificial genetic alphabet in the dendrimer reduced the noise. 
As a consequence, the assay now helps manage the care of some 400,000 patients annually, 
detecting as few as eight molecules of the analyte DNA in a sample. 

of an expanded genetic alphabet in a polymerase chain 
reaction14. This created, for the first time, a synthetic 
genetic system that can be repeatedly copied, with the 
level of mutation needed to support adaptation and 
evolution.

By searching for synthetic systems that could 
recreate such emergent properties, synthetic biolo-
gists have discovered a great deal. For example, it 
was proposed that DNA polymerases scan the minor 
groove of a DNA duplex to look for unshared pairs 
of electrons as a recognition feature37. It was likewise 
proposed that this scanning of the minor groove was 
essential for the high fidelity of DNA replication. 
Efforts to obtain polymerases to support the evolution 
of the artificial genetic system led to the discovery 
that minor-groove scanning is not an essential feature 
of all polymerases.

Today, the effort to make a synthetic chemical 
system that is capable of Darwinian evolution is an 
important focus of the National Science Foundation’s 
Chemical Bonding Program. Here, the details of the 
chemical structures of nucleobases that are essential 
to support genetics have been determined, with the 
goal of repairing specific chemical problems that 
limit the use of specific components of an expanded 
genetic alphabet. For example, several components of 
an artificial genetic system suffer from EPIMERIZATION; 
this has been rectified by adding nitro substituents to 
the nucleobases38. Another component of the artificial 

EPIMERIZATION
Organic molecules can have 
configurational isomers that 
have the same number of atoms, 
and that are bonded in the same 
way, but that differ in the 
orientation of the atoms in three 
dimensions. Epimerization 
is the spontaneous 
interconversion of such 
isomers.

TAUTOMERIC
Isomeric forms of organic 
molecules in which the same 
number of atoms are bonded in 
the same way, except for 
hydrogen atoms, which are 
positioned differently. 

BUILDING MODULE
A discrete unit used in the 
construction of a larger 
structure.

system, iso-guanosine, has a minor TAUTOMERIC form 
that cross bonds with thymidine, creating a significant 
number of mutations in polymerase chain reactions. 
This defect was solved by replacing a nitrogen in the 
structure by a carbon atom39.

Because it provides rule-based molecular recognition 
that is orthogonal to the recognition provided by natural 
DNA, this synthetic genetic system is found today in the 
clinic. As part of the Bayer VERSANT branched DNA 
diagnostic assay40, synthetic biology helps to manage 
the care of approximately 400,000 patients infected with 
HIV and hepatitis viruses each year10.11 (FIG. 2).

Seeking interchangeable parts: proteins
The amino acid as a building module in proteins. The 
synthetic biology of nucleic acids is successful because 
the repeating charge in the backbone enables the nucle-
otide parts to be exchanged independently (although 
we acknowledge the fact that some RNA structures, 
such as G-rich sequences, are themselves problematic 
to engineer). Proteins, unfortunately, do not have a 
repeating charge; engineering them has therefore been 
more difficult.

Proposals to engineer proteins, for which the inter-
changeable unit is the amino acid, is as old as recom-
binant DNA technology41,42. This idea was discussed in 
an engineering context in 1983 by Kevin Ulmer, then 
director of exploratory research at Genex43. In Ulmer’s 
vision, synthetic biologists would first alter the behav-
iours of proteins by replacing amino acid BUILDING MOD
ULES in the natural proteins. The replacements would 
come from the standard set of 20 natural amino acids, 
and would be chosen using primitive design principles 
to meet specific goals defined by the properties desired 
in the synthetic protein. Such primitive principles might, 
for example, place charged residues at the top and bot-
tom of α helices, or strategically alter amino-acid size 
complementarity in the active site of an enzyme.

Design based on such primitive rules was expected 
to frequently fail. Failure, however, would drive the 
development of better design rules44. This would 
generate a cycle, involving the setting of a goal, the 
replacement of amino acids to create proteins to meet 
the goal using the improved design rules, followed by 
success and failure, refinement of the design rules, and 
the setting of new goals. This process might go on for 
decades, and perhaps even generate some of the emer-
gent properties that characterize biological systems. 
This vision remains largely unrealized. The 20 years of 
experience since Ulmer presented his vision has shown 
that the behaviour of a protein is not a simple combina-
tion of independent contributions from the constituent 
amino acids45.

The failure of the independence approximation was, 
in large part, expected46. First, amino acids in a folded 
polypeptide sequence strongly interact with others, 
even amino acids distant in the polypeptide chain47. 
More seriously, even the simplest of molecular interac-
tions are poorly understood. Today, chemical theory 
still cannot retrodict the freezing point of water48, the 
solubility of simple salts in water49, or the packing of 

536 | JULY 2005 | VOLUME 6 

© 2005 Nature Publishing Group 

 www.nature.com/reviews/genetics

crystals of simple organic molecules50. Protein folding 
is, in one view, an aggregate of these particular proc-
esses. A theory that cannot manage the particulars is 
not expected to manage the whole. Nevertheless, the 
synthetic effort will be crucial for demonstrating and 
overcoming these limitations of theory.

Serious efforts are under way to improve the compu-
tational tools needed to design and engineer proteins51–53. 
Some have attempted to improve design principles by 
examining ROTAMERS of amino acids, where different 
arrangements of side-chain atoms are used as the build-
ing modules, rather than the amino acids themselves54. 
Small protein folds have focused the simplification of 
design issues55. These include elegant examples from the 
laboratories of Imperiali, Allemann and Mayo.

Today, the technology of amino-acid replacement 
is done using a combination of calculation, design, 

a

A

b

AL
BL
AD

BD

B

C

C(cid:127)A(cid:127)B

C(cid:127)P*

C(cid:127)P

C             

CD

CL(cid:127)P

CD(cid:127)P

CLL

CDD

Figure 3 | A self-templating system built from peptide 
units. a | A de novo designed peptide ligase. α-helical 
peptides A and B bind to the electrostatically complementary 
α-helical peptide C to form the C(cid:127)A(cid:127)B ternary complex, 
which is composed of two coiled coils. Peptide A has a 
modified amino terminus that reacts with the chemically 
modified carboxyl terminus of peptide B on formation of the 
ternary complex. The reaction of peptides A and B is a 
ligation that forms the product C(cid:127)P (C(cid:127)P* represents the 
chemical reaction between A and B to produce P). b | 
Peptide replicator schematic based on the reaction illustrated 
in part a, showing the reaction of peptide A with peptide B on 
formation of a ternary complex with peptide C. Peptides AL, 
BL, and CLL are composed of L-amino acids, whereas 
peptides AD, BD, and CDD are composed of D-amino acids. 
Peptides CLL and CDD are produced autocatalytically in a 
template-directed fashion through the reaction of precursors 
AL with BL, and AD with BD, respectively. Therefore, this 
replicator is stereochemically selective, only producing 
products (CLL and CDD) that are isomerically pure. Part b 
modified, with permission, from REF. 65 © American Chemical 
Society (2001) and from Nature REF. 66 © (2001) Macmillan 
Magazines Ltd. 

R E V I E W S

screening, selection, and luck56. Even so, the outcome has 
been positive57; many useful enzymes have emerged by 
means of amino acid replacement, including polymer-
ases used for DNA sequencing58, reverse transcriptases 
that use PCR to amplify synthetic genetic systems14, 
and enzymes in commercial laundry detergents59. But 
these are far from a synthetic biology that captures the 
emergent properties of living systems.

The protein-folding unit as the building module. Proteins 
are built from secondary structure units, including the 
α helix and the β strand60. This gave rise to the idea 
that such secondary structural elements might serve as 
interchangeable parts to support protein design61.

Kaiser and his many students have been especially 
successful in using the amphiphilic helix as the inter-
changeable building unit. In an amphiphilic secondary 
structure, hydrophobic and hydrophilic amino-acid side 
chains are arranged in the sequence so that a hydrophilic 
side of the unit can face water, while a hydrophobic side 
can be buried in the protein fold. Such amphiphilic 
structures are expected to pack spontaneously in water.
Using this strategy, DeGrado et al. designed an arti-
ficial polypeptide that reproduced some of the folding 
and biological properties of mellitin, a protein from the 
sting of a bee, without reproducing its exact sequence62. 
The designed peptide was amphiphilic, and the model 
proposed that its hydrophobic side buries itself in the 
hydrophobic membrane of a cell. Amphiphilic helices 
as units have frequently been exploited since then63. 
Analogous approaches have used the β strand as the 
architectural module64.

Several laboratories have worked to create emergent 
biological properties, including templated replication, 
by using secondary structural elements as interchange-
able building modules. For example, the Ghadiri 
laboratory designed a peptide by assembling α helical 
coiled coils to obtain a peptide ligase65 and a peptide 
replicator66 (FIG. 3).

Much of this work falls squarely within the definition 
of biomimetic chemistry, in that it reproduces isolated 
behaviours of natural biological systems. This includes 
using amphiphilic helices as design elements to create 
a synthetic enzyme that catalyzes the decarboxylation 
of oxaloacetate67. Further work with modular design 
has improved this artificial enzyme68. A wide range of 
catalytic activities are now being sought in this fashion 
based on the modular assembly of secondary struc-
ture building units. These include artificial enzymes 
that catalyze ester hydrolysis69, oxidize phenol using 
molecular oxygen70 and catalyze aldol reactions71.

Despite these successes, helices and strands remain 
challenging as building modules to support synthetic 
biology in proteins. Even when amphiphilic elements 
assemble in water to form a fold, the interior packing is 
often dynamic (a ‘molten globule’). Subsequent design, 
trial and luck are required to refine the dynamic core 
to make it rigid. More trivially, many protein design 
projects have failed simply because proteins have a 
tendency to precipitate. The backbones of proteins do 
not carry a repeating charge (like nucleic acids do); 

© 2005 Nature Publishing Group 

 VOLUME 6 | JULY 2005 | 537

ROTAMERS 
(Rotational isomers). Isomeric 
forms of organic molecules that 
have the same number of atoms, 
that are bonded in the same 
way, but in which the placement 
of atoms in three dimensional 
space differs by their rotation 
around single bonds. 

NATURE REVIEWS | GENETICS 

R E V I E W S

instead, the repeating unit is a dipole (the amide link-
age), which is well suited for self-aggregation. Much of 
protein design, therefore, is an effort to design peptides 
that remain dissolved in water.

It has been suggested that natural selection might 
have used secondary structural elements as inter-
changeable parts in constructing new proteins. Vestiges 
of such swapping might be detectable in very ancient 
steps for the construction of proteins72. But the recent 
widespread recruitment of function (proteins that 
share 50% sequence identity can catalyze very differ-
ent reactions73) seems to have arisen primarily through 
point mutation, insertion and deletion.

The natural protein as the engineering unit. As we 
move from the atomic to the macroscopic world, the 
next step considers folded proteins as interchange-
able parts. The biosphere contains proteins that have 
a wide diversity of physical and catalytic properties. 
For several decades, metabolic engineers have asked 
whether these can be reassembled as building modules 
to create new pathways that capture at least some of the 
emergent properties of biological systems. This might 
be done without needing to solve the difficult problem 
of constructing artificial proteins from scratch.

The simplest idea behind metabolic engineering has 
been to simply redirect the metabolism of a cell by alter-
ing its genetic makeup74. This has long been achieved 
by non-rational means; fermentation strains obtained 
by classical screening and selection are widely used in 
industry (in the synthesis of citric acid, for example)75. 
The advent of recombinant DNA technology has led to 
enhanced efforts to pick and choose enzymes from a 
range of organisms and then to assemble these enzymes 
into a single organism to produce products that might 
not be native to the organism. For example, Fukui et al.76 
constructed a strain of the bacterium Ralstonia eutropha 
that was able to produce poly(3-hydroxybutyrate-co-3-
hydroxyhexanoate) from fructose (FIG. 4a). The strain 
was engineered by introducing genes for various steps 
in the pathway from two other microorganisms in 
addition to R. eutropha.

An analogous example comes from the Department of 
Synthetic Biology at the division of Physical Biosciences 
at the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory77. Here, 
researchers developed a strain of Escherichia coli that 
could synthesize amorphadiene, an isoprenoid precur-
sor for the antimalarial drug artemisinin. The pathway 
combined the acetoacetyl-CoA thiolase (encoded by the 
atoB gene) from E. coli, an isopentenylpyrophosphate 
isomerase from Haematococus pluvialis, and several 
enzymes from Saccharomyces cerevisiae (FIG. 4b). The 
Gates Foundation is now funding the scaling up of this 
process as part of its mission to generate inexpensive 
drugs for the third world.

As Khosla and Keasling noted78, metabolic engi-
neering generally requires more than simply throw-
ing enzymes together in a cell. Achieving a synthetic 
goal (here, a strain that produces a particular product) 
requires the management of complex metabolic and 
regulatory processes. In pursuit of this goal, one cannot 

help but learn about metabolism and its emergent 
behaviours, including the regulation of metabolism 
and the extent to which enzymes drawn from various 
sources can be combined independently. So, synthesis 
drives discovery and learning.

Using genes and genetic elements. One way to search 
for interchangeable parts is to identify the parts that are 
used in natural evolution. The archetypal example of 
modularity in evolution is found in genetic regulatory 
and signalling pathways. Here, combinations of pro-
teins often function as molecular switches, that is, they 
are stimulated by upstream events (ligand binding, a 
chemical reaction, or the movement of components into 
new locations) and generate an output, which can then 
serve as an input for another switch. Recruitment and 
the exchange of individual proteins in such pathways 
throughout eukaryotic evolution has generated many 
logical networks that control cellular behaviour79.

Given this natural precedent, one goal for synthetic 
biology is to take the proteins themselves as building 
modules and synthesize artificial regulatory circuits 
that have preselected inputs and outputs. As before, 
the motivation is not so much to construct ‘toys’, but 
rather to use the challenge of a synthetic goal to dis-
cover principles that connect the chemistry of signal 
transduction to emergent regulatory properties in 
complex biology.

Several examples show how this might be done. 
In signal transduction pathways that involve receptor 
tyrosine kinases, tyrosine-containing motifs are auto-
phosphorylated. These then dock to the Src homology 
2 (SH2) and phosphotyrosine-binding (PTB) domains 
of adaptor proteins, which, in turn, activate signalling 
pathways that generate specific cellular responses. The 
signal created by these events depends on the details 
of the adaptor proteins. For example, the SH2 domain 
of the growth factor receptor-bound protein 2 (GRB2) 
adaptor is flanked by two Src homology 3 (SH3) 
domains. These bind proteins, such as the guanine 
nucleotide exchange factor son of sevenless homolog 2 
(SOS2) and GRB2-associated binding protein 1 (GAB1) 
docking protein, which then help to activate the Ras and 
phosphatidylinositol 3’-kinase pathways, respectively. 
GRB2 therefore couples the phosphorylated motifs to 
signalling pathways that lead to cell survival, growth 
and proliferation. Different combinations lead to the 
opposite outcome. For example, autophosphorylated 
death receptors bind adaptors, such as fas (TNFRSF6)-
associated via death domain (FADD); this is followed by 
an analogous signalling process that promotes cell death 
through apoptosis.

In an intriguing study from Pawson’s group80, 
growth-promoting and death-promoting modules were 
rearranged. In this work, the phosphotyrosine recogni-
tion domains of GRB2 — either SH2 domain or ShcA 
phosphotyrosine-binding domain —were fused to the 
death effector domain of FADD. When the construct 
was transformed into fibroblasts, the synthetic adap-
tors re-routed the signals that normally lead to growth 
so that they instead resulted in cell death. Here, the 

538 | JULY 2005 | VOLUME 6 

© 2005 Nature Publishing Group 

 www.nature.com/reviews/genetics

R E V I E W S

synthetic goal confirmed the power (and, to some 
extent, the underlying correctness) of a modular model 
of regulation by this system.

It is clear that this type of restructuring of existing 
regulatory components will be used in the future to 

rewire signalling more generally. Here, the analogy with 
the construction of electrical circuitry has been used 
by Hasty et al.81, who recently reviewed some of the 
spectacular accomplishments in this area (summarized 
in BOX 2).

a

(R) 3-hydroxybutyryl-CoA

PhbB NADP+

NADPH

Ralstonia 
eutropha
Acetyl-CoA

R-specific enoyl CoA
hydratase from 
Aeromonas caviae

P(3HB-co-3HHx)

Acetoacetyl-CoA

Crotonyl-CoA

Butyryl-CoA

3-ketoheanoyl-CoA 

(R) 3-hydroxy-
hexyl-CoA

NADH

(S) 3-hydroxy-
butyryl-CoA 
dehydrogenase

NAD+

b  Mevalonate pathway

pMevT

Crotonase

(S) 3-hydroxybutyryl-CoA

Crotonyl-CoA reductase from
Streptomyces cinnamonensis

atoB HMGS tHMGR

ERG12 ERG8

A-CoA AA-CoA HMG-CoA

Mevalonate

ERG12 ERG8 MVD1

ERG12 ERG8 MVD1

ERG12 ERG8 MVD1

idi

idi

ispA

Mevalonate Mev-P Mev-PP IPP

DMAPP

Artemisinin pathway

FPP

OPP

ADS

DXP pathway

G3P

pSOE4

dxs

ippHp

ispA

OPP

ispA

IPP

ippHp

DMAPP

dxs

DXP MEP CDP-ME CDP-ME2P ME2,4cPP HMB4PP

Pyruvate

ispC

E. coli DYM1

Amorphadiene

O O
O

O

O

Artemisinin

Figure 4 | Using proteins as interchangeable parts in synthetic biology. a | The combination of enzymes from three sources 
in a Ralstonia eutropha host generated a strain that produced large amounts of a poly(3-hydroxybutyrate-co-3-hydroxyhexanoate) 
polymer from fructose. All enzymes from Ralstonia eutropha are shown in black, whereas those from Areomonas caviae and 
Streptomyces cinnamonensis are shown in green and red, respectively. Modified, with permission, from REF. 76 © American 
Chemical Society (2002). b | The combination of enzymes from three sources in an Escherichia coli host generated a strain of the 
bacterium that produced a precursor for artemisinin, an antimalarial drug. The challenge of this experiment lay in the need to 
curtail the pathway to recognize and avoid metabolite toxicity, while optimizing the yield of the desired product. The general 
methodology for the pathway design was to use an engineered mevalonate pathway that is absent in E. coli, rather than the DXP 
(1-deoxy-D-xylulose 5-phosphate) pathway that is native to the organism. The synthetic operons used are depicted, and the 
engineered pathway metabolites are shown in red. In the engineered mevalonate pathway, the fan of genes from ERG12 to ispA 
exist on multiple plasmids to tune the pathway for optimization of the product while avoiding metabolite toxicity. As depicted at the 
bottom of the figure, the E. coli strain DYM1, a strain deficient in isoprenoid synthesis, was used, because the DXP pathway was 
found to limit product yield, probably owing to an unrecognized link between the pathway and physiological control elements in 
the organism. Enzymes used (isolated from Saccharomyces cerevisiae unless otherwise noted): ADS, amorphadiene synthase; 
atoB, acetoacetyl-CoA thiolase (E. coli); dxs, 1-deoxy-D-xylulose 5-phosphate synthase; ERG12, mevalonate kinase; ERG8, 
phosphomevalonate kinase; HMGS, HMG-CoA synthase; idi, IPP isomerase (E. coli); ippHp, IPP isomerase (H. pluvialis); ispA, 
FPP synthase (E. coli); ispC, 1-deoxy-D-xylulose 5-phosphate reductoisomerase; MVD1, mevalonate pyrophosphate 
decarboxylase; tHMGR, truncated HMG-CoA reductase. Pathway intermediates: AA-CoA, acetoacetly-CoA; A-CoA, acetyl-CoA; 
CDP-Me, 4-diphosphocytidyl-2-C-methyl-D-erythritol; CDP-ME2P, 4-diphosphocytidyl-2-C-methyl-D-erythritol 2-phosphate; 
DMAPP, dimethylallyl pyrophosphate; DXP, 1-deoxy-D-xylulose 5-phosphate; FPP, farnesyl pyrophosphate; G3P, glyceraldehyde 
3-phosphate; HMB4PP, 1-hydroxy-2-methyl-2-(E)-butenyl 4-pyrophosphate; HMG-CoA, hydroxymethylglutaryl-CoA; IPP, 
isopentenyl pyrophosphate; Mav-P, mevalonate 5-phosphate; ME-2,4cPP, 2-C-methyl-D-erythritol 2,4-cyclopyrophosphate; 
MEP, 2-C-methyl-D-erythritol 4-phosphate; Mev-PP, mevalonate pyrophosphate. Adapted, with permission, from Nature 
Biotechnology REF. 77 © (2003) Macmillan Magazines Ltd. 

NATURE REVIEWS | GENETICS 

© 2005 Nature Publishing Group 

 VOLUME 6 | JULY 2005 | 539

R E V I E W S

Box 2 | Engineering regulatory circuits

a  N-WASP

B
Arp
2/3

GBD
Output

Cdc42

+
PIP2

Cdc42 PIP2

GBD

B

Output

Arp
2/3

Actin polymerization
Off

On

Autoinhibited state

b  Synthetic switch design

PDZ ligand

PDZ

Output

PDZ

Output

The engineering of molecular circuits has recently been reviewed by Hasty 
et al.81 ; this article should be consulted for more details of the cases briefly 
reviewed below, and for further examples.

In one experiment in yeast, Lim and his co-workers rewired Mapk 

signalling93 and an actin regulatory switch known as N-WASP 94,95. N-WASP 
carries an output region that (in isolation) stimulates the polymerization of 
actin by binding the actin-related protein (Arp) 2/3 complex (see part a of 
the figure). This activity is autoinhibited, however, by means of two modules 
from N-WASP, a highly basic (B) motif and a guanosine 5’- triphosphatase 
(GTPase)-binding domain (GBD). These bind to two activating inputs, the 
phosphoinositide Pip2 and the activated GTPase Cdc42, where the 
respective binding disrupts autoinhibition. Because the two activating 
inputs function cooperatively, N-WASP behaves as an ‘AND’ gate; the output 
is positive (actin is polymerized) only if both Pip2 and Cdc42 inputs are 
present.

Lim and co-workers then attempted to reprogram the input control of 

Off

On

N-WASP. They tethered an unrelated modular domain–ligand pair (a PDZ 
domain and its cognate C-terminal peptide ligand) to the end of the N-WASP 
output domain (see part b of figure). They expected this to create an unnatural autoinhibitory interaction that could 
be relieved by the competitive binding of an external PDZ ligand. Under basal conditions, this synthetic switch was 
not activating. The unnatural autoinhibitory interaction was then removed by adding the PDZ ligand. The maximal 
activity was close to that of the isolated output domain. The result was the same switch, but one that was turned on by a 
different activator. 

The synthetic biologist then attempted to construct AND gates by tethering two unnatural modular domain-ligand 
pairs to the N-WASP output domain, replacing the two natural modules (B and GBD). A total of 34 constructs were 
synthesized and examined for their gating behaviour.

As expected for any real chemical system, the output depended on the concentrations of the input molecules, and 

was not predictable in an engineering sense. Some switches showed little basal repression. Others could not be 
activated. A few showed antagonistic gating, with one input activating and the other repressing. A few showed ‘OR’ 
gating, where one or the other input generated a positive output.

Nevertheless, about half of the synthetic constructs showed positive AND gating, where both inputs were required 
to generate a positive output. This input-output relationship was analogous to that seen with native N-WASP, but was 
obtained from a synthetic system, by using unnatural activators. Figure modified, with permission, from REF. 95 © 
(2004) Elsevier Science. 

Synthetic biological ‘toys’ can also be created. For 
example, an artificial oscillatory network (a ‘repressila-
tor’) was constructed in E. coli by Elowitz and Leibler16 
(FIG. 5) These synthetic biologists placed into an E. coli 
host three transcriptional repressor systems that are 
not together part of any natural biological system, and 
coupled these to the synthesis of green fluorescent pro-
tein. The fluorescent output of the cell oscillated as a 
function of time, providing a visual signal of the state of 
the oscillator in the cell. The oscillation period of hours 
was longer than the time typical to complete a cycle of 
cell division. This indicates that the state of the oscilla-
tor was transmitted from generation to generation, and 
became a property of a colony of cells.

The repressilator is, of course, a synthetic equivalent 
of oscillation systems that are found throughout biol-
ogy82. The goal of producing a synthetic oscillator might 
therefore lead to a deeper understanding of natural 
oscillators. For example, the repressilator showed noisy 
behaviour. This might arise from stochastic fluctuations 
of its component molecules, which are present in very 
few copies in individual cells. It might also reflect an 
interaction between the synthetic parts, or between the 
synthetic parts and the natural parts of the chemically 
complex biological host. For this type of network design 
to lead to an improved understanding of naturally 

occurring networks, we need to go back to analysis. 
A detailed analytical study of the synthetic system is 
needed, just as it was for the synthetic genetic systems or 
for the synthetic metabolic pathways described above.
Other toy systems have emerged in the past year. 
Some of these involve biomolecules other than pro-
teins. For example, a molecular automaton that plays 
tic-tac-toe interactively against a human opponent has 
been built using deoxyribozymes as the modules83. The 
system is based on a network of 23 molecular-scale 
LOGIC GATES and one constitutively active deoxyri-
bozyme. These are arrayed in nine wells (3 x 3), which 
correspond to the game board. To make a move, the 
molecular automaton analyzes the input oligonucle-
otide that is associated with a particular move by the 
human opponent and indicates a move by fluorescence 
signalling in a response well.

Where are the hazards of synthetic biology?
A provocative title such as ‘synthetic biology’ suggests 
a potential for hazard. Accordingly, the past year has 
seen a call for an ‘Asilomar for synthetic biology’84, a 
reference to a conference in Monterey in 1975 that 
considered the public hazards of the recombinant 
DNA technology that supports the synthetic biology 
discussed above.

© 2005 Nature Publishing Group 

 www.nature.com/reviews/genetics

LOGIC GATE
An arrangement of switches 
used to calculate operations in 
Boolean algebra; statements are 
connected into more 
complicated compound 
statements by the use of AND, 
NOT and OR relationships.

540 | JULY 2005 | VOLUME 6 

Much of what is currently called synthetic biology 
is congruent with the recombinant DNA technology 
discussed in Asilomar 30 years ago. This includes 
bacteria that express heterologous genes, proteins in 
which amino acids have been replaced, and cells with 
altered regulatory pathways. Placing a new name on 
an old technology does not create a new hazard.

Those seeking to create artificial chemical systems 
to support Darwinian processes are, however, creating 
something new. We must consider the possibility that 
these artificial systems might cause damage if, for exam-
ple, they escape from the laboratory. A general principle 
in biology is relevant for assessing this potential for 
hazard. The more different an artificial living system is 
from natural biological systems, the less likely it is that 
the artificial system will survive in the natural world. 
A living organism survives when it has access to the 
resources that it needs, and is more fit than competing 
organisms in recovering these. Therefore, a completely 
synthetic life form that has eight nucleotides (FIG. 1) in 
its genetic alphabet would find survival very difficult if 
it were to escape from the laboratory. What would it eat? 
Where would it get its unnatural nucleosides?

This general principle also applies to less exotic 
examples of engineered life. The 30 years of expe-
rience  with  genetically  altered  organisms  since 

TetR

–

CI

–

–

PLlacO1

tetR-lite

PLtetO1

cl-lite

PR

lacl-lite

LacI

a

b

120

100

80

60

40

20

)
s
t
i
n
u
 
y
r
a
r
t
i
b
r
a
(
 
e
c
n
e
c
s
e
r
o
u
F

l

0

0

100

200

300

Time (min)

400

500

600

Figure 5 | The design and application of the repressilator. a | Schematic showing the 
regulation pattern that forms the basis of a repressilator. Three gene–promoter pairs are 
arranged so that the product derived from the expression of the gene following a promoter is a 
repressor for the next promoter in the cycle. Black connecting lines show that promoter 
PLlacO1 controls the transcription of the gene tetR-lite, the tetracycline repressor protein TetR 
represses PLtetO1, which is the next promoter in the sequence. PLtetO1 in turn controls the 
transcription of cI-lite, and the protein CI represses the promoter PR. Finally, PR controls the 
expression of lacI-lite, and the lactose repressor protein LacI represses PLlacO1, completing 
the cycle. The suffix ‘-lite’ refers to the presence of tags that increase the degradation rate of 
the proteins. b | The luminescence pattern of a reporter plasmid that carries GFP under the 
transcriptional control of the PLtetO1 promoter, when the reporter construct is transferred to an 
Escherichia coli in the presence of the repressilator. As the experimental trace shows, the 
oscillation of the TetR repressor expressed from the repressilator results in the time dependent 
oscillation of GFP expression. Bars at the bottom of the diagram show the timing of cell division 
events. The period of the oscillations is longer than the cell division time, and the cycle of 
oscillations continues in the subsequent generations. Adapted, with permission, from Nature 
REF. 16 © (2000) Macmillan Magazines Ltd. 

R E V I E W S

Asilomar have indicated that virtually any human-
engineered organism is less fit than its natural coun-
terpart in a natural environment. If they survive at 
all in the environment, they do so either under the 
nurturing of an attentive human, or by ejecting their 
engineered features. Therefore, an E. coli engineered 
to play tic-tac-toe might survive in the human intes-
tine, but would probably do so by jettisoning its 
game-playing skills.

Losing genetic information is much easier than 
obtaining new information. By contrast with the power 
of Darwinian processes implied by the Jurassic Park 
principle (‘life finds a way’), Darwinian processes are 
highly conservative when it comes to creating new 
functions. When tackling new problems, Darwinian 
systems take small steps from what they already have; 
they are not innovators on a large scale. Extinctions 
are one consequence of this, occurring when the envi-
ronmental challenges change too fast for Darwinian 
processes to keep pace.

This is seen, for example, with natural life. The Ebola 
virus would spread more rapidly if it became airborne and 
less virulent, as would anthrax bacteria that were trans-
missible from an infected human host to an uninfected 
human. The fact that these features have not emerged 
in these infectious agents indicates the difficulty that 
Darwinian evolution has in generating such novel prop-
erties in existing organisms. In fact, the most hazardous 
type of bioengineering is the type that is not engineering 
at all, but reproduces exactly an already existing virulent 
agent. The synthesis of smallpox virus85 is perhaps the 
riskiest recent example of synthetic biology.

The discussion so far presumes an absence of 
malice. Suppose one actually wanted to do damage? 
Would one genetically engineer E. coli carrying ricin to 
create a threat? Or place fuel and fertilizer in a rented 
truck and detonate it outside a Federal Building? We 
know the answer to this question for one individual; 
Timothy McVeigh used the latter method to damage 
the federal building in Oklahoma City a decade ago. 
We do not know it for all individuals. 

At the 2004 International Meeting on Synthetic 
Biology in Boston, one discussion centered on the 
‘hacker culture’, referring to those who create com-
puter viruses. As is the case whenever resources are 
diverted from productive to non-productive activity, 
computer viruses and spam cause human deaths. 
What if a group of people set out to create an airborne 
Ebola virus? And what if a synthetic biologist, hav-
ing set the man-on-the-moon goal of creating such 
a virus, to learn more about how viruses become 
airborne, told (through the published literature) the 
biohacker how to do it?

However, the potential benefits of synthetic biol-
ogy must be juxtaposed with this hazard. History 
provides only a partial guide. For example, in 1975, 
the City of Cambridge banned recombinant DNA 
research in an effort to manage what it perceived 
as a danger in this technology. In the same decade, 
an ill-defined syndrome noted in patients having 
‘acquired immune deficiency’ was emerging around 

NATURE REVIEWS | GENETICS 

© 2005 Nature Publishing Group 

 VOLUME 6 | JULY 2005 | 541

R E V I E W S

Box 3 | Other directions in synthetic biology

As synthetic methods emerge, the various activities that can lay claim to the title of 
‘synthetic biology’ has expanded beyond what can be covered in a single article. 
Listed here are just three other themes in the discipline, each with a leading reference.

One example is the ‘top-down’ approach towards synthetic biology that is being 

pioneered by Venter and his colleagues96. These authors have stripped genes from a 
living bacterium to determine the minimal set of genes that is required to support a 
cellular life form. Determining the minimal biological functions required to sustain life 
will be important for understanding primitive organisms in both a functional and 
evolutionary context. In addition, synthetic biologists who are practicing a ‘bottom-up’ 
approach will find this information crucial for designing synthetic biological systems 
that include all the necessary components — either in the form of genes or their 
synthetic equivalents — that are required to sustain life or a desired biological property.
Various types of artificial life that live in silico97 have been suggested as being a form 

of ‘synthetic biology’. This approach involves using simulations to evolve 
computational analogues of the emergent behaviours of living systems. Many of 
these artificial life forms compete for resources (such as computer processor cycles) 
within a computer, and therefore evolve.

Yet another type of synthetic biology uses individual cells as interchangeable 

parts, and attempts to engineer cell–cell communication. This has recently been 
reviewed in REF. 98.

the planet as an important health crisis. Without 
the technology that had been banned by the City 
of Cambridge, it would have been difficult to learn 
what the human immunodeficiency virus was, let 
alone have compounds in hand today that manage the 
infection. Today, as SARS, bird influenza, and other 
infectious disease emerge from animal populations, 
recombinant DNA technology is what distinguishes 
our ability to manage this threat today and what was 
possible a century ago.

Conclusions
This might be the last time that a short review on syn-
thetic biology will attempt to span work that ranges 
from organic chemistry to intercellular interactions. 
Even in 2005, much has been done to do justice to the 
individual topics discussed here. Several of these are 
mentioned in BOX 3.

Truly interchangeable parts have,  so far, been 
obtained only by applying synthetic biology to nucleic 
acids. Here, the independence approximation seems 
to be adequate because of the repeating charge on the 
backbone, which remains constant while the informa-
tion-containing nucleobases are changed. The repeat-
ing charge dominates the physical properties of the 
molecule overall, allowing the pieces to be replaced 
independently.

Because of the robustness of the interchangeable 
parts in expanded genetic information systems, we 
suspect that an artificial chemical system that supports 
Darwinian evolution — the bridge between non-life 
and life86 — will first be obtained with these. Here, the 
man-on-the-moon goal cannot help but deepen our 
understanding of the relationship between chemistry 
and life.

To obtain the same with proteins will require the 
development of basic chemical theory, including a better 
understanding of the behaviour of water, the dissolution 
of salts in water, and the packing of organic molecules. 
A well-targeted set of experiments, coupled with the 
appropriate theory, would help this system develop more 
rapidly. As with the synthetic biology of nucleic acids, 
chemistry will drive the development of the field.

Folded protein modules behave with sufficient 
independence to be useful building modules in syn-
thetic biology. Here, we expect a substantial amount 
of exciting work over the next few years, as synthetic 
biologists struggle with the chemical reality, determine 
which modules behave independently, and define 
synthetic goals accordingly. Here, synthesis will 
demonstrate its power as a complement to analysis 
in the development of theory and the modification 
of paradigms associated with genetic regulation. The 
setting of ambitious synthetic goals cannot help but 
deepen our understanding of the intimate relationship 
between chemistry and life at the regulatory level, and 
better understand the emergent properties of complex 
biological systems.

1.   Hobom, B. Surgery of genes. At the doorstep of synthetic 

biology. Medizin. Klinik 75, 14–21 (1980).

2.   Rawls, R. ‘Synthetic Biology’ makes its debut. Chem. 

Eng. News 49–53 (24 April 2000).

3.   Benner, S. A. Redesigning life. Organic chemistry and the 

evolution of protein. Chimia 41, 142–148 (1987).

4.   Szostak, J. W., Bartel, D. P. & Luisi, P. L. Synthesizing life. 

Nature 409, 387–390 (2001).

5.   Benner, S. A. Act natural. Nature 421, 118 (2003). 

This paper outlines the importance of pursuing the 
science of synthetic biology.

6.   Breslow, R. Centenary Lecture. Biomimetic chemistry. 

Chem. Soc. Rev. 1, 553–580 (1972).

7.   Salt, G. W. Use of the term ‘emergent properties’. 

Comment. Am. Nat. 113, 145–148 (1979).

8.   Benner, S. A. (ed.) Redesigning the Molecules of Life 

115–175 (Springer, Heidelberg, 1988). 

9.   Gibbs, W. W. Synthetic life. Sci. Am. 290, 74–81 (2004).
10.   Elbeik, T. et al. Simultaneous runs of the Bayer VERSANT 
HIV-1 version 3.0 and HCV bDNA version 3.0 quantitative 
assays on the system 340 platform provide reliable 
quantitation and improved work flow. J. Clin. Microbiol. 42, 
3120–3127 (2004).

11.   Elbeik, T. et al. Multicenter evaluation of the performance 

characteristics of the Bayer VERSANT HCV RNA 3. 0 
assay (bDNA). J. Clin. Microbiol. 42, 563–569 (2004).

12.   Benner, S. A. Redesigning genetics. Science 306, 

625–626 (2004).

13.   Latham, J. A., Johnson, R. & Toole, J. J. The application 

20.   Sen, D. & Gilbert, W. Novel DNA superstructures formed 

of a modified nucleotide in aptamer selection. Novel 
thrombin aptamers containing 5-(1-pentynyl)-2’-
deoxyuridine. Nucleic Acids Res. 22, 2817–2822 
(1994).

14.   Sismour, A. M. et al. PCR amplification of DNA containing 

non-standard base pairs by variants of reverse 
transcriptase from Human Immunodeficiency Virus-1. 
Nucleic Acids. Res. 32, 728–735 (2004). 
This paper describes the first example of an artificial 
genetic system that can be replicated by enzymes, 
and highlights some important concepts in the 
design of genetic systems.

15.   Battersby, T. R. et al. Quantitative analysis of receptors for 
adenosine nucleotides obtained via in vitro selection from 
a library incorporating a cationic nucleotide analog. J. Am. 
Chem. Soc. 121, 9781–9789 (1999).

16.   Elowitz, M. B. & Leibler, S. A synthetic oscillatory network 
of transcriptional regulators. Nature 403, 335–338 (2000).

17.   Ruben, A. J. & Landweber, L. F. The past, present and 

future of molecular computing. Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 
1, 69–72 (2000).

18.   SantaLucia, J. & Hicks, D. The thermodynamics of DNA 
structural motifs. Ann. Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struct. 33, 
415–440 (2004).

19.   Rich, A. & Zhang, S. G. Z-DNA: the long road to biological 

function. Nature Rev. Genet. 4, 566–572 (2003).

by telomere-like oligomers. Biochemistry 31, 65–70 
(1992). 

21.   Kazakov, S. & Altman, S. A. Trinucleotide can promote 

metal ion-dependent specific cleavage of RNA. Proc. Natl 
Acad. Sci. USA 89, 7939–7943 (1992).

22.   Benner, S. A. Understanding nucleic acids using 

synthetic chemistry. Acc. Chem. Res. 37, 784–797 
(2004).

23.   Ball, P. Synthetic biology: starting from scratch. Nature 

431, 624–626 (2004).

24.   Freier, S. M. & Altmann, K. H. The ups and downs of 

nucleic acid duplex stability: structure-stability studies on 
chemically-modified DNA:RNA duplexes. Nucleic Acids 
Res. 25, 4429–4443 (1997).

25.   Pitha, J., Pitha P. M. & Ts’o, P. O. Poly(1-vinyluracil): the 
preparation and interactions with adenosine derivatives. 
Biochim. Biophys. Acta 204, 39–48 (1970).

26.   Schneider, K. C. & Benner, S. A. Oligonucleotides 

containing flexible nucleoside analogs. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
112, 453–455 (1990).

27.   Nielsen, P. E. PNA technology. Mol. Biotechnol. 26, 

233–248 (2004).

28.   Benner, S. A. & Hutter, D. Phosphates, DNA, and the 
search for nonterrean life: A second generation model 
for genetic molecules. Bioorg. Chem. 30, 62–80 
(2002).

542 | JULY 2005 | VOLUME 6 

© 2005 Nature Publishing Group 

 www.nature.com/reviews/genetics

R E V I E W S

29.   Wilds, C. J., Wawrzak, Z., Krishnamurthy, R., 

56.   Arnold, F. H. Combinatorial and computational 

79.   Lim, W. A. The modular logic of signaling proteins: Building 

Eschenmoser, A. & Egli, M. Crystal structure of a B-form 
DNA duplex containing (L)-α-threofuranosyl (3'→2') 
nucleosides: A four-carbon sugar is easily accommodated 
into the backbone of DNA. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 124, 
13716–13721 (2002).

30.   Wengel, J. Synthesis of 3′-C- and 4′-C-branched 

oligodeoxynucleotides and the development of locked 
nucleic acid (LNA). Acc. Chem. Res. 32, 301–310 
(1999).

31.   Hutter, D., Blaettler, M. O. & Benner, S. A. From phosphate 

to bis(methylene) sulfone: Non-ionic backbone linkers in 
DNA. Helv. Chim. Acta. 85, 2777–2806 (2002).

32.   Declercq, R., Van Aerschot, A., Read, R. J., Herdewijn, P. 

& Van Meervelt, L. Crystal structure of double helical 
hexitol nucleic acids. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 124, 928–933 
(2002).

33.   Larralde, R., Robertson, M. P. & Miller, S. L. Rates of 

decomposition of ribose and other sugars. Implications for 
chemical evolution. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 92, 8158–
8160 (1995).

34.   Eschenmoser, A. Chemical etiology of nucleic acid 

structure. Science 284, 2118–2124 (1999).

35.   Ricardo, A., Carrigan, M. A., Olcott, A. N. & Benner, S. A. 

Borate minerals stabilize ribose. Science 303, 196 
(2004).

36.   Geyer, C. R., Battersby, T. R. & Benner, S. A. Nucleobase 
pairing in expanded Watson-Crick-like genetic information 
systems. Structure 11, 1485–1498 (2003).

37.   Meyer, A. S., Blandino, M. & Spratt, T. E. Escherichia 

coli DNA polymerase I (Klenow fragment) uses a 
hydrogen-bonding fork from Arg(668) to the primer 
terminus and incoming deoxynucleotide triphosphate to 
catalyze DNA replication. J. Biol. Chem. 279, 33043–
33046 (2004).

38.   Hutter, D. & Benner, S. A. Expanding the genetic 

alphabet. Non-epimerizing nucleoside with the pyDDA 
hydrogen bonding pattern. J. Org. Chem. 68, 9839–9842 
(2003).

39.   Martinot, T. A. & Benner, S. A. Artificial genetic systems: 

exploiting the ‘aromaticity’ formalism to improve the 
tautomeric ratio for isoguanosine derivatives. J. Org. 
Chem. 69, 3972–3975 (2004). 

40.   Collins, M. L. et al. A branched DNA signal amplification 
assay for quantification of nucleic acid targets below 100 
molecules/ml. Nucleic Acids Res. 25, 2979–2984 
(1997).

41.   Schmeissner, U. & Miller, J. H. Genetic studies of Lac 

repressor. Experientia 32, 811–811 (1976).

42.   Smith, M. Synthetic DNA and biology (Nobel lecture). 

Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 33, 1214–1221 (1994).

43.   Ulmer, K. M. Protein engineering. Science 219, 666–671 

(1983).

44.   Arnold, F. H. et al. Engineering nonaqueous solvent-

compatible enzymes. ACS Symp. Ser. 516, 109–113 
(1993).

45.   Mildvan, A. S. Inverse thinking about double mutants of 

enzymes. Biochemistry 43, 14517–14520 (2004).

46.   Knowles, J. R. Tinkering with enzymes: what are we 

learning? Science 236, 1252–1258 (1987).

47.   Fukami-Kobayashi, K., Schreiber, D. R. & Benner, S. A. 
Detecting compensatory covariation signals in protein 
evolution using reconstructed ancestral sequences. 
J. Mol. Biol. 319, 729–743 (2002).

48.   Ding, K., Chandler, D., Smithline, S. J. & Haymet, A. D. 
Density-functional theory for the freezing of water. Phys. 
Rev. Lett. 59, 1698–1701 (1987). 

49.   Zepik, H. & Benner, S. A. Catalysts, anticatalysts, and 
receptors for unactivated phosphate diesters in water. 
J. Org. Chem. 64, 8080–8083 (1999).

50.   Dunitz, J. D. & Bernstein, J. Disappearing polymorphs. 

Acc. Chem. Res. 28, 193–200 (1995).

51.   Mayo, K. H. Recent advances in the design and 

construction of synthetic peptides: for the love of basics or 
just for the technology of it. Trends Biotechnol. 18, 212–217 
(2000).

52.   Venkatraman, J., Shankaramma, S. C. & Balaram, P. Design 

of folded peptides. Chem. Rev. 101, 3131–3152 (2001).

53.   Dwyer, M. A., Looger, L. L. & Hellinga, H. W. 

Computational design of a biologically active enzyme. 
Science 304 1967–1971 (2004). 
This paper illustrates the progress made in the de 
novo design of biological molecules.

54.   Shah, P. S., Hom, G. K. & Mayo, S. L. Preprocessing of 

rotamers for protein design calculations. J. Comput. 
Chem. 25, 1797–1800 (2004).

55.   Ali, M. H., Peisach, E., Allen, K. N. & Imperiali, B. X-ray 
structure analysis of a designed olilgomeric miniprotein 
reveals a discrete quaternary architecture. Proc. Natl 
Acad. Sci. USA 101, 12183–12188 (2004).

challenges for biocatalyst design. Nature 409, 253–257 
(2001).

57.   First, E. A. & Fersht, A. R. Analysis of the role of the 

KMSKS loop in the catalytic mechanism of the tyrosyl-
tRNA synthetase using multimutant cycles. Biochemistry 
34, 5030–5043 (1995).

58.   Tabor, S. & Richardson, C. C. A single residue in DNA 
polymerases of the Escherichia coli DNA polymerase I 
family is critical for distinguishing between deoxy- and 
dideoxyribonucleotides. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 92, 
6339–6343 (1995).

59.   Igarashi, K., Hagihara, H. & Ito, S. Protein engineering of 

detergent α-amylases. Trends Glycosci. Glycotechnol. 15, 
101–114 (2003).

60.   Pauling, L. & Corey, R. B. Atomic coordinates and structure 
factors for two helical configurations of polypeptide chains. 
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 37, 235–240 (1951).

61.   Velicelebi, G., Patthi, S. & Kaiser, E. T. Design and 

biological activity of analogs of growth hormone releasing 
factor with potential amphiphilic helical carboxyl termini. 
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 83, 5397–5399 (1986).

62.   Degrado, W. F., Kezdy, F. J. & Kaiser, E. T. Design, synthesis 
and characterization of a cyto-toxic peptide with melittin-like 
activity. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 103, 679–681 (1981).

63.   Ghirlanda, G., Lear, J. D., Ogihara, N. L., Eisenberg, D. & 

DeGrado, W. F. A hierarchic approach to the design of 
hexameric helical barrels. J. Mol. Bio. 319, 243–253 
(2002).

64.   Quinn, T. P., Tweedy, N. B., Williams, R. W., Richardson, J. S. 

& Richardson, D. C. Betadoublet: de novo design, 
synthesis, and characterization of a β-sandwich protein. 
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 91, 8747–8751 (1994).

65.   Kennan, A. J., Haridas, V., Severin, K., Lee, D. H. & 
Ghadiri, M. R. A de novo designed peptide ligase: A 
mechanistic investigation. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 123, 1797–
1803 (2001).

66.   Saghatelian, A., Yokobayashi, Y., Soltani, K. & Ghadiri, M. R. 

A chiroselective peptide replicator. Nature 409, 797–801 
(2001). 
The chiroselective peptide replicator developed in 
this article illustrates the modular design aspects of 
synthetic biology and the ability to replicate 
information in a peptide based system.

67.   Johnsson, K., Allemann, R. K., Widmer, H. & Benner, S. A. 

Synthesis, structure and activity of artificial, rationally 
designed catalytic polypeptides. Nature 365, 530–532 
(1993).

68.   Taylor, S. E., Rutherford, T. J. & Allemann, R. K. Design of 

a folded, conformationally stable oxaloacetate 
decarboxylase. J. Chem. Soc. Perkin Trans. 2, 751–755 
(2002). 

69.   Nicoll, A. J. & Allemann, R. K. Nucleophilic and general 

acid catalysis at physiological pH by a designed 
miniature esterase. Org. Biomol. Chem. 2, 2175–2180 
(2004).

70.   Kaplan, J. & DeGrado, W. F. De novo design of catalytic 
proteins. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 101, 11566–11570 
(2004).

71.   Tanaka, F. & Barbas, C. F. A modular assembly strategy for 

improving the substrate specificity of small catalytic 
peptides. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 124, 3510–3511 (2002).

72.   Roy, S. W. & Gilbert, W. Complex early genes. Proc. Natl 

Acad. Sci. USA 102, 1986–1991 (2005).

73.   Benner, S. A. & Ellington, A. D. Interpreting the behavior of 
enzymes. Purpose or pedigree? CRC Crit. Rev. Biochem. 
23, 369–426 (1988).

74.   Jacobsen, J. R. & Khosla, C. New directions in 

metabolic engineering. Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 2, 133–
137 (1998). 
This paper presents some of the recent work in 
metabolic engineering that is typically used in 
synthetic biology.

75.   Das, A. Strain selection in citric acid fermentation. A 

review. Curr. Sci. 41, 593–596 (1972). 

76.   Fukui, T., Abe, H. & Doi, Y. Engineering of Ralstonia 

eutropha for production of poly(3-hydroxybutyrate-co-3-
hydroxyhexanoate) from fructose and solid-state properties 
of the copolymer. Biomacromolecules 3, 618–624 (2002).
77.   Martin, V. J., Pitera, D. J., Withers, S. T., Newman, J. D. & 

Keasling, J. D. Engineering a mevalonate pathway in 
Escherichia coli for production of terpenoids. Nature 
Biotech. 21, 796–802 (2003). 
The development of a bacterial strain that can 
synthesize pharmaceuticals illustrates the power of 
synthetic biology as a tool for technology.

78.   Khosla, C. & Keasling, J. D. Metabolic engineering for drug 

discovery and development. Nature Rev. Drug Discov. 2, 
1019–1025 (2003). 
This paper highlights the complexity that is required 
to engineer a metabolic pathway successfully.

allosteric switches from simple binding domains. Curr. 
Opin. Struct. Biol. 12, 61–68 (2002). 
This paper lays the foundation for designing 
complex logic networks.

80.   Howard, P. L., Chia, M. C., Del Rizzo, S., Liu, F. F. & 

Pawson, T. Redirecting tyrosine kinase signaling to an 
apoptotic caspase pathway through chimeric adaptor 
proteins. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 100, 11267–11272 
(2003).

81.   Hasty, J., McMillen, D. & Collins, J. J.. Engineered gene 

circuits. Nature 420, 224–230 (2004).

82.   Eisen, H., Brachet, P., Pereira da Silva L. & Jacob, F. 

Regulation of repressor expression in λ. Proc. Natl Acad. 
Sci. USA 66, 855–862 (1970).

83.   Stojanovic, M. N. & Stefanovic, D. A deoxyribozyme-

based molecular automaton. Nature Biotech. 21, 
1069–1074 (2003). 
This paper illustrates not only the ability to develop 
interactive logic networks, but also some of the 
new kinds of technology that synthetic biology is 
producing.

84.   Ferber, D. Synthetic biology. Time for a synthetic biology 

Asilomar? Science 303, 159 (2004).

85.   Cello, J., Paul, A. V. & Wimmer, E. J. Chemical synthesis of 

poliovirus cDNA: Generation of infectious virus in the 
absence of natural template. Science 297, 1016–1018 
(2002). 
The chemical synthesis of poliovirus cDNA 
described in this article illustrates the ability to 
synthesize life; the paper also discusses the dangers 
of synthetic biology and organism engineering.

86.   Rasmussen, S., Chen L., Nilsson, M. & Abe, S. Bridging 
nonliving and living matter. Artif. Life 9, 269–316 (2003).
87.   Belovsky, G. E. et al. Ten suggestions to strengthen the 

science of ecology. Bioscience 54, 345–351 (2004).

88.   Steitz, T. A. & Moore, P. B. RNA, the first macromolecular 

catalyst: the ribosome is a ribozyme. Trends Biochem. Sci. 
28, 411–418 (2003).

89.   Bearden, D. A. A complexity-based risk assessment of 
low-cost planetary missions: when is a mission too fast 
and too cheap? Acta Astronaut. 52, 371–379 (2003).

90.   Kuhn, T. S. The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (Univ. 

Chicago Press, 1962).

91.   Masterman, M. in Criticism and the Growth of Knowledge 
(eds Lakatos, I. & Musgrave, A. ) 59–89 (Cambridge Univ. 
Press, 1970).

92.   Woodward, R. B. Recent advances in the chemistry of 

natural products. Pure Appl. Chem. 17, 519–547 
(1968).

93.   Park, S. H., Zarrinpar, A. & Lim, W. A. Rewiring MAP 
kinase pathways using alternative scaffold assembly 
mechanisms. Science 299, 1061–1064 (2003).

94.   Prehoda, K. E., Scott, J. A., Mullins, R. D. & Lim, W. A. 

Integration of multiple signals through cooperative 
regulation of the N-WASP-Arp2/3 complex. Science 290, 
801–806 (2000).

95.   Dueber, J. E., Yeh, B. J., Bhattacharyya, R. P. & Lim. W. A. 
Rewiring cell signaling: the logic and plasticity of eukaryotic 
protein circuitry. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 14, 690–699 (2004).
96.   Hutchison, C. A. et al. Global transposon mutagenesis and 
a minimal mycoplasma genome. Science 286, 2165–2169 
(1999).

97.   Adami, C. Introduction to Artificial Life (Springer, New York, 

1998).

98.   Yokobayashi, Y., Collins, C. H., Leadbetter, J. R., Arnold, F. 

H. & Weiss, R. Evolutionary design of genetic circuits and 
cell-cell communications. Adv. Complex Systems 6, 37–45 
(2003).

Competing interests statement
The authors declare no competing financial interests.

 Online links

DATABASES
The following terms in this article are linked online to:
Entrez Gene: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.
fcgi?db=gene
Fadd | Gab1 | Grb2 | Sos2

FURTHER INFORMATION
Benner laboratory: http://www.chem.ufl.edu/groups/benner
Kool laboratory: http://www.stanford.edu/group/kool
National Science Foundation’s Program in Chemical 
Bonding: http://www.nsf.gov/news/news_summ.jsp?cntn_id=
100424&org=NSF&from=news
The Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation: http://www.
gatesfoundation.org
Access to this interactive links box is free online.

NATURE REVIEWS | GENETICS 

© 2005 Nature Publishing Group 

 VOLUME 6 | JULY 2005 | 543

