Vol 438|24 November 2005|doi:10.1038/nature04335

REVIEWS

Reconstruction of genetic circuits

David Sprinzak1 & Michael B. Elowitz1

The complex genetic circuits found in cells are ordinarily studied by analysis of genetic and biochemical perturbations.
The inherent modularity of biological components like genes and proteins enables a complementary approach: one can
construct and analyse synthetic genetic circuits based on their natural counterparts. Such synthetic circuits can be used
as simple in vivo models to explore the relation between the structure and function of a genetic circuit. Here we describe
recent progress in this area of synthetic biology, highlighting newly developed genetic components and biological lessons
learned from this approach.

By taking apart an old clock, you could probably come up with

a pretty good guess at how it works. But a more concrete
understanding of the clock mechanism might be obtained by
designing and building one’s own clock out of similar parts.
Contemporary biology presents us with similar reverse-engineering
problems. For example, Drosophila cells contain a circadian clock
that oscillates with a 24-h rhythm and self-synchronizes to the day/
night cycle. Using genetic and biochemical techniques, researchers
have isolated genes and proteins involved in interlocked feedback
loops of gene expression1,2 (Fig. 1b) that are necessary for clock
function. However, many fundamental questions remain difﬁcult to
answer: what sets the period of the oscillation, how does the clock
operate reliably in diverse cellular conditions, and what features of its
design are responsible for its reliable operation? To gain insight into
such questions one could design and build new clock circuits, using
similar genes and proteins, and study their dynamics in the organism.
In fact, several synthetic genetic clocks have now been constructed in
bacteria3–5 (Fig. 1c). These circuits are much simpler than the
Drosophila clock. They fail to operate as reliably, but they provide a
proof of principle for a synthetic approach to understanding genetic
circuits.

As with the clock, many compelling biological questions centre on
how interactions among genes and proteins,
forming genetic
circuits, give rise to speciﬁc cellular functions. Genetic and
biochemical techniques have successfully identiﬁed many circuit
components and their interactions. However,
in many cases
knowledge about these components and their interactions is not
sufﬁcient to explain the circuit mechanism. What is missing from
the circuit diagram? There are several possible deﬁciencies: one is
that the diagram may be incomplete—interactions may have been
missed. The opposite problem also exists: the diagram may be too
complete, in the sense that it contains interactions that are not
actively involved in the process being investigated (for example, if
one of the proteins is not expressed under the relevant con-
ditions). Another problem is ignorance of the effective rules by
which proteins and genes interact. For example, in vivo values of
kinetic parameters such as afﬁnities, binding and degradation
rates, and so on, are generally unknown. Finally, the intracellular
environment is intrinsically ‘noisy’, and small copy numbers of
molecular species limit the predictability of biochemical reactions6.
Taken together, these problems reduce our conﬁdence in the
combined understanding we get from perturbations, measurements
and mathematical modelling.

A reconstructive approach to genetic circuits may offer unique

insight into their underlying mechanisms. In this approach, one
constructs synthetic replicas of natural genetic circuits out of well-
characterized elements, such as genes, proteins, regulatory sequences,
and so on, and observes their dynamics in living cells (Fig. 1a). This
scheme offers several advantages. First, one can test the sufﬁciency of
an arbitrary circuit for generating a particular function. Second, one
may study the circuit mechanism without impairing cellular func-
tions or inducing downstream consequences. Third, different circuit
designs with similar functions can be directly compared to determine
their relative advantages and disadvantages7. Such synthetic circuit
reconstruction is made possible by the technologies of molecular
biology such as construction of recombinant DNA molecules. Its
future progress will beneﬁt from further advances such as recent
improvements in longer DNA synthesis8.

In this way, synthetic genetic circuits can function as physical
models of natural genetic circuits. The use of physical models to
understand natural phenomena is common throughout the sciences
in general and biology in particular. Linus Pauling discovered the
a -helix structural motif by building physical ball-and-stick models
of proteins9. In molecular biology, the synthesis of an artiﬁcial
chromosome in yeast proved the necessity and sufﬁciency of
particular combinations of sequence elements for chromosome
function10. Most similarly, in the ﬁeld of protein design, proteins
can be designed de novo based on principles and motifs discovered
in natural proteins11,12. For example, understanding of protein–
protein interactions is facilitated by design of synthetic interacting
proteins12.

We describe here how synthetic biology can address biological
questions at the level of genetic circuits. We review some tools
developed for synthetic biology and a few speciﬁc experiments that
use these tools to answer fundamental biological questions. Finally,
we discuss future directions of this approach. Owing to space limits,
we conﬁne ourselves to a small subset of the much larger, and rapidly
growing, ﬁeld of synthetic biology, reviewed elsewhere13–18 and in this
issue19.

Modular circuit components
In order to build synthetic circuits, one needs genetic components
that are well characterized, modular (that is, function similarly
in different systems) and act independently of other cellular pro-
cesses. Early synthetic biology experiments focused on transcrip-
tional regulation components because they are relatively well
understood and easy to reconﬁgure. For example, repressors were
used to create feedback loops of various sizes in Escherichia coli in

1California Institute of Technology, Division of Biology and Department of Applied Physics, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California 91125, USA.

© 2005 Nature Publishing Group 

443

REVIEWS

NATURE|Vol 438|24 November 2005

order to understand noise suppression20, bistability21,22 and oscil-
lations3 in circuits of one, two and three repressors, respectively.
Similarly, synthetic cascades without feedback provided information
on delays23, noise propagation6,24 and sensitivity25. More recently,
some of these transcriptional circuit designs have been created and
analysed in mammalian systems using newly developed transcrip-
tional regulators26,27. In one case, a synthetic bistable switch was
shown to operate in a mouse26.

Nevertheless, it is clear that many natural circuits are fundamen-
tally non-transcriptional. An amazing example is the cyanobacterial
circadian clock, the operation of which depends on protein phos-
phorylation but can be independent of transcription and translation
(in contrast to its counterpart in Drosophila)28. Thus, it is critical
to appropriate other interaction mechanisms, such as protein modi-
ﬁcation, regulated degradation, and so on, for use in synthetic
circuits.

One class of such non-transcriptional regulatory control mecha-
nism involves trans-acting RNA molecules, such as microRNAs.
Regulation by RNA offers promising applications in synthetic
biology because of the inherent versatility of its sequence-based
targeting mechanism29. Recently, Bayer and Smolke30 reported the
development of designed ‘anti-switches’ composed of a modular
ligand-binding (aptamer) domain joined to a regulatory domain that
inhibits translation of speciﬁc target mRNAs in a ligand-dependent
fashion (Fig. 2a). Isaacs et al.31 described ‘cis-repressed’ riboregula-
tory molecules containing a translation-repressing hairpin RNA
structure. Complementary trans-acting RNA molecules relieve inhi-
bition by the hairpin, allowing gene expression. Both types of

components should ﬁnd applications in synthetic circuits that
require combinatorial control of gene expression.

Small molecules such as hormones and metabolites carry out
many cellular functions—can they be used in synthetic genetic
circuits? Recently, Fung et al.5 created the ‘metabolator’, a synthetic
circuit in which transcriptional control of metabolic enzymes
generate oscillations between two metabolite pools: acetyl CoA
versus acetyl phosphate and acetate (Fig. 2b). The metabolic enzymes
that interconvert these two metabolites are under the transcriptional
control of acetyl phosphate-sensitive regulators. On a larger scale,
metabolic enzymes from plant, yeast and E. coli were arranged in
synthetic pathways to produce amorpha-4,11-diene32, a precursor
of the highly effective anti-malarial drug artemisinin. Synthetic
metabolic pathway construction has the potential to enable synthesis
of medically important compounds and may also shed light on
fundamental issues of pathway design.

Small diffusible molecules naturally used for intercellular com-
munication have also been appropriated for synthetic circuits. For
example, acyl-homoserine lactone (AHL), a signalling molecule in
diverse bacteria33, was recently34 used to implement a simple multi-
cellular patterning system in E. coli, loosely analogous to a morpho-
gen gradient35 (Fig. 2c). In this work, AHL was produced by a ‘sender’
strain localized to the centre of a Petri dish. A second set of ‘receiver’
strains contained synthetic transcriptional circuits that combine
positive and negative responses to AHL and thereby serve as ‘band-
pass’ detectors. As a result, the ﬂuorescent output gene was expressed
only in cells within a speciﬁc range of distances from the source (that
is, in a ring). Owing to an unanticipated design feature of the circuit,

Figure 1 | Natural and synthetic genetic circuits. a, The synthetic biology
paradigm. Genetic circuits are composed of interacting genes and proteins
(blue shapes, top left). The pointed and blunt arrows represent positive and
negative regulation, respectively. Synthetic circuits (top right) based on the
natural circuit can be constructed from well-characterized components (red
and orange shapes) with similar regulatory effects to form similar or
simpliﬁed circuits. The dynamics of these synthetic replicas can be
compared to the natural system as well as to mathematical models. Analysis
of natural circuits, synthetic replicas and models together can help us
understand mechanisms used by natural systems. b, The Drosophila
circadian clock is an actively studied natural clock circuit (simpliﬁed scheme
based on Cyran et al.2). It contains a negative feedback loop in which Per and

Tim, after a delay, repress their own production (via Clk/Cyc, right loop).
Interlocked with this negative feedback loop is another loop involving Vri
and PDP11 (left loop). The diagram is highly simpliﬁed and many details of
the process have been omitted, including post-translational modiﬁcations,
nuclear transport and active degradation. c, The ‘repressilator’ is a simple
synthetic clock circuit consisting of a three-component negative feedback
loop that operates in E. coli3. The three-element loop provides a delayed
negative feedback on all components and permits oscillations. In this sense,
it models the generation of oscillations by delayed negative feedback.
However, as can be seen from the ﬁgure this simple synthetic circuit differs
markedly from the natural circadian clock in both complexity and design.

444

© 2005 Nature Publishing Group 

NATURE|Vol 438|24 November 2005

REVIEWS

the position of this ring did not vary over time as the signal diffused
outward from its source. This effect was attributed to a dynamic delay
within the circuit: one transcription factor had to be diluted by cell
growth to allow expression of the reporter. Thus, the authors
uncovered a design strategy for creating stationary patterns from a
diffusive gradient that grows with time. We are not aware of evidence
for this mechanism in natural morphogen systems; however, similar
problems may appear in development, and it will be exciting to see
whether synthetic circuits can address them.

One concern when building synthetic genetic circuits is the effects
that they might have on endogenous cellular functions. Ideally, one
would like circuits to operate independently of the rest of the cell, but
the limits to such independence remain unclear. Recently, a step in
this direction was taken by Rackham and Chin36, who generated a set
of ‘orthogonal’ ribosome–mRNA pairs. They used a novel selection-
counterselection scheme to select three speciﬁcally interacting pairs
of ribosome binding sites and their complementary regions on the
16S rRNA (Fig. 2d). These orthogonal ribosomes represent partially
independent protein production lines. Their approach might be
extended to other steps in gene expression, for example, by creating
orthogonal sigma factors for prokaryotic transcription. Circuits
based on such orthogonal systems may provide better understanding
of the natural regulation of global processes like transcription and
translation.

Lessons learned from synthetic circuits
The tools above, and others, will facilitate the development of novel
synthetic circuits, but the ultimate value of this approach will depend
on what general principles it reveals about circuit design. So far,
several important lessons have emerged from the earliest results.

The intracellular environment differs in many ways from the
idealized test tubes in which we imagine biochemical reactions
occurring and that form the basis for most mathematical models.
For example, the cellular environment is highly variable. This
variability arises in two ways. First, owing to the low copy number
of many cellular molecules, stochastic effects in biochemical reac-
tions can be signiﬁcant. This stochasticity, or ‘intrinsic noise’, causes
biochemical reactions to be partly unpredictable, and therefore more
difﬁcult to model. Second, individual cells differ from one another in
many ways. This ‘extrinsic noise’ causes cell–cell differences in circuit
dynamics37. There is an interplay between the two types of noise:
intrinsic noise in one cellular component, such as a transcription
factor, may contribute to extrinsic noise in other components, such
as its target genes. Synthetic biology experiments have been instru-
mental in probing both types of noise and revealing the strong effect
they have on the function of genetic circuits.

Rosenfeld et al.38 used time-lapse movies to analyse a synthetic
cascade in which a ﬂuorescent repressor protein and its target gene
were monitored simultaneously in individual cells (Fig. 3a). Their

Figure 2 | Modular components in synthetic circuits. a, RNA ‘anti-
switches.’ These molecules contain an aptamer domain that binds to a
speciﬁc effector (small molecule ligand), as well as a sequence recognition
domain complementary to a target mRNA. Binding of the effector changes
the conformation of the switch and enables control of target gene
expression30. b, The ‘metabolator.’ This synthetic oscillatory circuit relies on
regulated metabolic ﬂuxes. Oscillations occur between two pools of
metabolites, here labelled M1 and M2 (see text). M2 indirectly regulates the
metabolic enzymes E1 and E2, corresponding to phosphate acetyltransferase
and acetate kinase. Two extreme states of the oscillator are shown in the
diagram. On the left, the system has lots of M1 and little M2. In this state, the
enzyme activities are small, causing substantial net ﬂux from M1 to M2. On
the right is the opposite state in which M2 levels are high and M1 levels are
low. Now, E1 and E2 levels increase, reversing the net ﬂux5. c, Formation of

spatial patterns by a synthetic multicellular circuit. Mixed populations of
engineered E. coli strains are placed on a Petri dish. Sender cells, localized to
the centre (top left), emit AHL, which diffuses away. Band detector strains
throughout the plate (right) respond to speciﬁc ranges of AHL using a
synthetic band detector circuit. The result is concentric ring patterns of gene
expression (bottom left), in which two different detector strains (green and
red) turn on at speciﬁc distances from the source34. d, Synthesis of orthogonal
ribosome–mRNA pairs. The 16S ribosomal subunit and a target ribosome-
binding site sequence were coevolved to recognize one another speciﬁcally and
uniquely (left). A chloramphenicol resistance gene was subcloned together
with each of the evolved ribosome-binding sites and co-transformed with
each evolved, and one wild-type, 16S subunit, to produce a ‘matrix’ of
strains. As shown on the right, only strains containing matched pairs are able
to grow in media containing high levels of chloramphenicol36.

© 2005 Nature Publishing Group 

445

REVIEWS

NATURE|Vol 438|24 November 2005

results showed how noise and gene regulation combine to determine
the instantaneous rate of expression of a typical gene. The experi-
ments assessed the timescale and amplitude of noise, in the regu-
lation of a speciﬁc gene, and showed that the extrinsic component of
the noise makes a dominant contribution to the total noise. They also
revealed that most ﬂuctuations do not ‘average out’ over a cell cycle,
and therefore the response curve of a repressor–promoter system is
not well deﬁned at the single cell level. In related work, Pedraza and
van Oudenaarden24 constructed a linear cascade of three repressors,
together with three corresponding ﬂuorescent protein reporters.
They showed how ﬂuctuations propagate in a transcriptional cas-
cade. This work used a previously developed theoretical framework39
to provide an integrated analysis of noise at the circuit level. It
remains to be seen how cells and human genetic circuit designers
might use such fundamentally noisy components to make reliable
circuits.

Synthetic biology relies on the rearrangement of modular elements
to create novel circuits. Rather than designing a speciﬁc circuit, it is
also possible to create combinatorial libraries of many possible
circuits. What can such libraries teach us about the computational
power and functional diversity of simple biological systems?

Recently, Guet et al.40 addressed this question by creating a
synthetic circuit ‘slot machine’ in which each of three transcriptional
regulatory genes was controlled by one of ﬁve possible promoters
(Fig. 3b). The resulting circuit library was screened for its response to
two different chemical inputs that interacted with two of the
repressors. A surprisingly large fraction of the diverse circuit designs
generated computationally interesting functions, such as NAND and
NOR. In this example, the map of known interactions among the
components did not uniquely determine the circuit function. Rather,
examples were found in which the same circuit architecture pro-
duced different functions, as well as others in which the same
function was encoded by circuits with different architectures. This
synthetic biology experiment demonstrates what a rich functional
diversity can be obtained with even a relatively small number of
components.

Similarly, Dueber et al.41 recently explored analogous structure–
function relations at the level of protein domains. They built a library
consisting of a kinase domain fused to various ligand-binding
regulatory domains placed in different positions within the protein.
They determined the activity of the kinase in the presence and
absence of two ligands speciﬁc for domains contained in each
protein. They found that a large diversity of different functions
could be encoded in individual proteins by recombining modular
protein domains. The implications at the protein level are similar to
those at the circuit level: recombination of modular units can rapidly
explore the space of possible functions. It remains to be seen what
limits the functional spectrum in these cases.

A ﬁnal lesson from synthetic circuits involves ﬁdelity in signal
transduction. Park et al.42 used a synthetic approach to study how
signal ﬁdelity is maintained within pathways that share components.
In yeast, both the mating pheromone and osmolarity stress response
pathways signal through the mitogen-activated protein (MAP)
kinase Ste11, yet they exhibit no crosstalk. This insulation is accom-
plished by the protein scaffolds Ste5 and Pbs2 that bind Ste11
together with other pathway-speciﬁc components (Fig. 3c). Even
though Ste11 participates in two pathways (interacts with two
scaffolds), it transduces a signal while in a complex with speciﬁc
upstream and downstream components. Park et al.42 replaced natural
tethering interactions with synthetic alternatives that were sufﬁcient
to tether together the different components of the MAP kinase
cascade and allow signal propagation. To show the sufﬁciency of
tethering, they created a synthetic hybrid scaffold consisting of a
modiﬁed fusion protein of Ste5 and Pbs2. This construct effectively
re-wired the signalling pathway so that pheromone induced osmo-
regulatory responses. Here, the synthetic approach involves rewiring,
rather than reconstruction per se, and demonstrates that the

Figure 3 | Lessons from synthetic biology. a, Noise in gene regulation6. A
synthetic transcriptional cascade was constructed to analyse the gene
regulation function (GRF) in single cells (top panel). The GRF is the relation
between the protein production rate ( y axis in graph) and the concentration
of its repressor protein (x axis). The transcriptional cascade comprises
reporter gene, cyan ﬂuorescent protein (CFP), under a l PR promoter, which
can be repressed by CI repressor fused to yellow ﬂuorescent protein (YFP).
The CI-YFP fusion protein is under the control of TetR repressor (repression
of TetR can be removed through addition of aTc (anhydrotetracycline); TetR
is under a constitutive promoter PC). Each orange point in the graph
(bottom panel) represents a measurement made in a single cell at a given
time. The average GRF is given by the orange line. Measurements from two
selected lineages are indicated in cyan and magenta. The data show
signiﬁcant ﬂuctuations in the GRF that vary slowly, with a timescale of
approximately one cell cycle. These results show that the GRF is not well
deﬁned at the single cell level. b, Exploring the functional potential of
transcriptional circuits40. Three transcriptional regulators and ﬁve
promoters were rearranged to produce a small library of random genetic
circuits, four of which are shown here (columns). For each circuit, the
expression of a green ﬂuorescent reporter gene (G) was measured with and
without each of two extracellular inducers (IPTG and aTc). Circuits with
four different output functions (yellow–green ﬂuorescence versus four
indicated input conditions) are shown here patched onto agar plates;
however, each pair shares a single circuit structure, shown below. In these
diagrams, A, B and C refer to transcriptional regulatory proteins. Note that
different functions are seen with the same diagram (columns 1–2 and 3–4),
and similar (but not identical) functions are produced by different diagrams
(columns 1 and 4)49. c, Rewiring signalling pathways. The pheromone and
osmolarity response pathways in yeast (top) use protein scaffolds (Ste5 and
Pbs2) to avoid crosstalk through the shared component Ste11. By
constructing a modiﬁed fusion protein of Pbs2 and Ste5, the authors
constructed a rewired pathway in which cells produce osmolarity stress
responses after pheromone induction42.

446

© 2005 Nature Publishing Group 

NATURE|Vol 438|24 November 2005

REVIEWS

principal requirement for signalling through a pathway is proximity
of components. It also suggests a simple mechanism by which signal
transduction pathways might evolve new capabilities.

than their natural counterparts. However, perhaps at this stage one
can learn more by putting together a simple, if inaccurate, pendulum
clock than one can by disassembling the ﬁnest Swiss timepiece.

Challenges for synthetic circuit design
Constructing a functional synthetic circuit requires assembling
diverse genetic elements and getting them to work together. In
general, combining disparate components requires the tuning of
biochemical parameters such as afﬁnities or rate constants, which is
often difﬁcult to implement in biological circuits3,25. Characteriza-
tion of a component may be valid in one context (locus, plasmid,
strain, environment, and so on), but not in others. How can one
design an operating circuit given these limitations? Several strategies
have been applied. First, the use of tunable elements, such as
transcription factors derived from tetR43,44, allows external control
over some parameters. Second, one can screen libraries of mutated
components, or apply directed evolution in the laboratory, to
optimize parameters45. A third strategy is to use robust circuit designs
that are inherently insensitive to unknown or variable parameters.
Such designs are particularly interesting because they may have been
selected by evolution for the very same property46.

A related challenge is computational modelling of genetic circuits.
Modelling is essential both for analysis of natural systems and also for
design of synthetic ones. However, several problems complicate its
application to cellular circuits. These include parameter sensitivity,
the lack of effective rules to simplify complex circuits, and the
difﬁculty of incorporating extrinsic noise. Because synthetic circuits
are simpler and better characterized than their natural counterparts,
they will probably offer ideal test systems to develop and reﬁne
models. The results should apply both to natural and synthetic
circuits.

Future directions
What are the goals of the synthetic circuit paradigm outlined here?
One is to better understand natural circuits by building minimal
replicas of those circuits, observing their dynamics in vivo, and
comparing them to one another and to their natural counterparts.
The synthetic circuits presented above are highly simpliﬁed. How-
ever, as we gain conﬁdence and expertise in our ability to build,
model and analyse these circuits, we will be able to construct replicas
of greater verisimilitude. Possible natural circuits that could be
investigated this way include decision making in response to stress
and DNA damage, as in the natural p53/mdm2 circuit47, differen-
tiation in response to extracellular signals, as in oocyte maturation48,
and regulated temporal oscillations, as in the cell cycle and circadian
clock1,10. Circuits that use the intrinsically noisy nature of the cell to
create probabilistic behaviours are particularly compelling examples.
A second goal is to discover what other, non-natural, circuit
designs are possible given realistic biological components, and
which of those operate reliably in vivo. This will be achieved by
building and characterizing a variety of alternative circuit designs in
living cells. In this way, one may ask what advantages naturally
evolved circuits have over synthetic ones. For example, the synthetic
clock designs described earlier have not been discovered to occur in
nature, suggesting that natural designs may confer better perform-
ance. At the same time, non-natural designs may prove useful for
biotechnology applications32.

Perhaps the most intriguing problem is how a circuit operates in
the context of a complete organism. There are no dotted lines inside
the cell isolating circuits from one another. The ultimate test for this
synthetic approach is to delete natural circuits and replace them with
synthetic counterparts within organisms. This will require synthetic
circuits to interface with the rest of the cell. For example, by replacing
the Drosophila circadian clock with synthetic versions we could learn
more about the interaction of the circadian module with other
functional subsystems in the organism. Even the most optimistic
synthetic biologist would expect such circuits to be less functional

1. Hardin, P. E. The circadian timekeeping system of Drosophila. Curr. Biol. 15,

R714–-R722 (2005).

2. Cyran, S. A. et al. vrille, Pdp1, and dClock form a second feedback loop in the

3.

Drosophila circadian clock. Cell 112, 329–-341 (2003).
Elowitz, M. B. & Leibler, S. A synthetic oscillatory network of transcriptional
regulators. Nature 403, 335–-338 (2000).

4. Atkinson, M. R., Savageau, M. A., Myers, J. T. & Ninfa, A. J. Development of

genetic circuitry exhibiting toggle switch or oscillatory behaviour in Escherichia
coli. Cell 113, 597–-607 (2003).
Fung, E. et al. A synthetic gene–-metabolic oscillator. Nature 435, 118–-122
(2005).
Rosenfeld, N., Young, J. W., Alon, U., Swain, P. S. & Elowitz, M. B. Gene
regulation at the single-cell level. Science 307, 1962–-1965 (2005).

5.

6.

7. Alves, R. & Savageau, M. A. Extending the method of mathematically

controlled comparison to include numerical comparisons. Bioinformatics 16,
786–-798 (2000).
Tian, J. et al. Accurate multiplex gene synthesis from programmable DNA
microchips. Nature 432, 1050–-1054 (2004).
Judson, H. The Eighth Day of Creation (Simon and Schuster, New York, 1979).
Ingolia, N. T. & Murray, A. W. The ups and downs of modeling the cell cycle.
Curr. Biol. 14, R771–-R777 (2004).

8.

9.
10.

11. Bolon, D. N., Voigt, C. A. & Mayo, S. L. De novo design of biocatalysts. Curr.

Opin. Chem. Biol. 6, 125–-129 (2002).

12. Kortemme, T. & Baker, D. Computational design of protein-protein

interactions. Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 8, 91–-97 (2004).

13. Brent, R. A partnership between biology and engineering. Nature Biotechnol. 22,

1211–-1214 (2004).

14. McDaniel, R. & Weiss, R. Advances in synthetic biology: on the path from

prototypes to applications. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 16, 476–-483 (2005).
15. Benner, S. A. & Sismour, A. M. Synthetic biology. Nature Rev. Genet. 6,

533–-543 (2005).

16. Hasty, J., McMillen, D. & Collins, J. J. Engineered gene circuits. Nature 420,

224–-230 (2002).

17. Arkin, A. P. Synthetic cell biology. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 12, 638–-644

(2001).

18. Pawson, T. & Linding, R. Synthetic modular systems–-reverse engineering of

signal transduction. FEBS Lett. 579, 1808–-1814 (2005).

19. Endy, D. Foundations for engineering biology. Nature doi:10.1038/nature04342

(this issue).

20. Becskei, A. & Serrano, L. Engineering stability in gene networks by

autoregulation. Nature 405, 590–-593 (2000).

21. Gardner, T. S., Cantor, C. R. & Collins, J. J. Construction of a genetic toggle

switch in Escherichia coli. Nature 403, 339–-342 (2000).

22. Kobayashi, H. et al. Programmable cells: interfacing natural and engineered

gene networks. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 101, 8414–-8419 (2004).

23. Rosenfeld, N. & Alon, U. Response delays and the structure of transcription

networks. J. Mol. Biol. 329, 645–-654 (2003).

24. Pedraza, J. M. & van Oudenaarden, A. Noise propagation in gene networks.

Science 307, 1965–-1969 (2005).

25. Hooshangi, S., Thiberge, S. & Weiss, R. Ultrasensitivity and noise propagation

in a synthetic transcriptional cascade. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 102, 3581–-3586
(2005).

26. Kramer, B. P. et al. An engineered epigenetic transgene switch in mammalian

cells. Nature Biotechnol. 22, 867–-870 (2004).

27. Kramer, B. P. & Fussenegger, M. Hysteresis in a synthetic mammalian gene

network. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 102, 9517–-9522 (2005).

28. Nakajima, M. et al. Reconstitution of circadian oscillation of cyanobacterial

KaiC phosphorylation in vitro. Science 308, 414–-415 (2005).

29. Carrington, J. C. & Ambros, V. Role of microRNAs in plant and animal

development. Science 301, 336–-338 (2003).

30. Bayer, T. S. & Smolke, C. D. Programmable ligand-controlled riboregulators of

31.

eukaryotic gene expression. Nature Biotechnol. 23, 337–-343 (2005).
Isaacs, F. J. et al. Engineered riboregulators enable post-transcriptional control
of gene expression. Nature Biotechnol. 22, 841–-847 (2004).

32. Martin, V. J., Pitera, D. J., Withers, S. T., Newman, J. D. & Keasling, J. D.

Engineering a mevalonate pathway in Escherichia coli for production of
terpenoids. Nature Biotechnol. 21, 796–-802 (2003).

33. Henke, J. M. & Bassler, B. L. Bacterial social engagements. Trends Cell Biol. 14,

648–-656 (2004).

34. Basu, S., Gerchman, Y., Collins, C. H., Arnold, F. H. & Weiss, R. A synthetic

multicellular system for programmed pattern formation. Nature 434, 1130–-1134
(2005).

35. Ephrussi, A. & St Johnston, D. Seeing is believing: the bicoid morphogen

gradient matures. Cell 116, 143–-152 (2004).

36. Rackham, O. & Chin, J. W. A network of orthogonal ribosomezmRNA pairs.

Nature Chem. Biol. 1, 159–-166 (2005).

37. Elowitz, M. B., Levine, A. J., Siggia, E. D. & Swain, P. S. Stochastic gene

expression in a single cell. Science 297, 1183–-1186 (2002).

© 2005 Nature Publishing Group 

447

REVIEWS

NATURE|Vol 438|24 November 2005

38. Rosenfeld, N., Elowitz, M. B. & Alon, U. Negative autoregulation speeds
the response times of transcription networks. J. Mol. Biol. 323, 785–-793
(2002).

39. Paulsson, J. Summing up the noise in gene networks. Nature 427, 415–-418

(2004).

40. Guet, C. C., Elowitz, M. B., Hsing, W. & Leibler, S. Combinatorial synthesis of

genetic networks. Science 296, 1466–-1470 (2002).

41. Dueber, J. E., Yeh, B. J., Chak, K. & Lim, W. A. Reprogramming control of an

allosteric signalling switch through modular recombination. Science 301,
1904–-1908 (2003).

42. Park, S. H., Zarrinpar, A. & Lim, W. A. Rewiring MAP kinase pathways

using alternative scaffold assembly mechanisms. Science 299, 1061–-1064
(2003).

43. Lutz, R. & Bujard, H. Independent and tight regulation of transcriptional units in

Escherichia coli via the LacR/O, the TetR/O and AraC/I1–-I2 regulatory
elements. Nucleic Acids Res. 25, 1203–-1210 (1997).

44. Gossen, M. & Bujard, H. Tight control of gene expression in mammalian cells

by tetracycline-responsive promoters. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 89, 5547–-5551
(1992).

45. Yokobayashi, Y., Weiss, R. & Arnold, F. H. Directed evolution of a genetic

circuit. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 99, 16587–-16591 (2002).

46. Barkai, N. & Leibler, S. Robustness in simple biochemical networks. Nature 387,

913–-917 (1997).

47. Vogelstein, B., Lane, D. & Levine, A. J. Surﬁng the p53 network. Nature 408,

307–-310 (2000).

48. Xiong, W. & Ferrell, J. E. Jr A positive-feedback-based bistable ‘memory
module’ that governs a cell fate decision. Nature 426, 460–-465 (2003).
49. Guet, C. C. Tinkering with Bio-molecular Networks Thesis, Princeton Univ.

(2004).

Acknowledgements Synthetic biology work in the laboratory is supported by a
Burroughs-Wellcome CASI award, The HFSP program and the Searle Scholars
program. D.S. would like to acknowledge the support of the Yad Hanadiv
Foundation and the CBCD at Caltech. We would like to thank J. W. Chin,
C. Guet, S. Leibler, J. Liao, W. Lim, C. Smolke and R. Weiss for contributing
ﬁgures. We are grateful to R. Kishony, E. Sprinzak, C. Dalal, G. Suel and
members of the laboratory for discussions and comments.

Author Information Reprints and permissions information is available at
npg.nature.com/reprintsandpermissions. The authors declare no competing
ﬁnancial interests. Correspondence should be addressed to M.B.E.
(melowitz@caltech.edu).

448

© 2005 Nature Publishing Group 

